# Affective Forecasting: Predicting Non-Formulaic Emotions

Lindsey Chou & David Vacek

Affective forecasting is the (often flawed) process of attempting to
predict one’s emotional state in the future.
For example, when striving towards a career, rejecting or dismissing other sources of
happiness—such as relationships, friendships, family, hobbies or
travel—may seem like a rational sacrifice in order to achieve success.
However, what happens once you become successful? How long does this
happiness remain intact? Although many expect that achieving their goals
will grant them life-long happiness, this happiness tends to diminish
more quickly than one might expect.

Failures in affective forecasting may occur when people try to predict
their emotions after a variety of different events. For example, one
study conducted by Dunn et. al. (2003) asked students to predict their
happiness one year after receiving their university dorm assignment.
Although they believed their assignment would have a major impact on
their happiness, students did not report any significant difference in
happiness the following year. Another study conducted by Gilbert et. al.
(1998) demonstrated how assistant professors thought their tenure
decisions would have major impacts on their happiness, when actual
professors who did or did not receive tenure reported similar levels of
happiness. These studies demonstrate how people tend to believe that
certain events will have a larger, and often longer, effect on their
emotions than they truly do.

Though we have tried to unlock the dynamics of emotions after a decision
that could help us understand the emotional drive in making present and
future decisions, research has found one factor after another that
demonstrates why predicting emotions — affective forecasting — is so
challenging.

## Immune Neglect

The *psychological immune system* is a collective term used to describe
the cognitive mechanisms that help reduce our experience of negative
affective states. One example of this is denial, which one might employ
when receiving bad news, such as their significant other cheating on
them. Rather than suffer from the negative emotions that might come from
this betrayal, one way that our psychological immune system might
attempt to reduce this negative experience is by denying that it
happened in the first place. Even when one ultimately learns to accept
their misfortune, our psychological immune system often finds ways to
view negative events in a positive light. In this way, our psychological
immune system helps bring our affective states toward homeostasis.

Our psychological immune system manifests itself in our everyday lives.
Doing something embarrassing seems much worse in the moment than it does
weeks, even days afterwards. The euphoria one might feel after winning a
competition or completing a passion project may be profound in the
moment, but becomes less intense as time goes on. The psychological
immune system works best when we are not paying attention to it, and
thus people generally overlook the fact that their psychological immune
system exists to regulate their emotions — people suffer from *immune
neglect* which contributes to their tendency to overestimate the
duration of their affective reactions. Immune neglect is the tendency
for people to overlook the cognitive mechanisms that help them to cope
with and adapt to negative experiences or events. This results in a
*durability bias,* or our misbelief that powerful events must have
long-standing emotional consequences, when our emotions actually have a
tendency to revert to normal quicker than expected.

Gilbert et. al. (1998) conducted one of the hallmark studies on immune
neglect. Researchers had participants report on their general happiness,
whether they were currently in a romantic relationship, and whether they
had experienced a breakup. They then asked participants to predict how
happy they would feel after a breakup. Results showed that those who had
never experienced a breakup (referred to as “luckies”) predicted that
the breakup would leave them significantly less happy than those who had
actually experienced a breakup before (unfortunately referred to as the
“leftovers”). In other words, Gilbert et. al. demonstrated how people
believe that the dissolution of a romantic relationship will have a
greater impact on their happiness than it actually does. Further studies
demonstrate how this overestimation of negative affect is much greater
than the underestimation of positive affect; people make larger
affective forecasting errors related to negative emotions over positive
emotions. This supports the idea of immune neglect, as the psychological
immune system is especially designed to ease our negative emotions.

So, why do people tend to neglect their psychological immune system?
Although there is no definite answer to this question, Gilbert et. al.
propose three helpful approaches to understanding why people may not
consider the power of their immune system. First, if people were always
aware of their psychological immune system, they may begin to devalue
their desired outcomes. This is because they might think about how the
happiness they would feel from achieving said outcome is only fleeting,
and thus be less encouraged to attain it. Second, being hyper aware of
one’s immune system may inadvertently suppress it. Third, if people
believe that their immune system will help ameliorate all their negative
feelings, they may be less inclined to take conscious action to improve
themselves. They may feel that they can rely on solely emotion-focused
coping (learning to regulate one’s negative emotions) rather than
problem-focused coping (dealing with the external source of one’s
problems), both important methods of reducing negative affect (Lazarus,
1985). Furthermore, even when people do realize that they have
mispredicted their affective states (e.g. realizing that a experiencing
a breakup wasn’t so bad), they may attribute this to other factors
besides their psychological immune system (e.g. believing they must have
not liked their significant other all that much). Each of these are
potential reasons why people remain generally unaware of, or at least do
not actively think about, their psychological immune system.

## Focalism

Another contributor to errors in affective forecasting is focalism. When
making affective forecasts, people often focus much more on the single
event in question and overlook the impact of subsequent events. To test
this phenomena, Wilson et. al. (2000) conducted a study where they asked
college football fans to predict how the outcome of a college football
game would affect their happiness. One group of participants was asked
to complete a “prospective” diary of all the time they thought they
might spend on future activities after the football game, whereas another
group was merely asked to think about the football game outcome.
They found that fans who completed the prospective diary were less
likely to overpredict their emotions than the control group. These
findings demonstrate how thinking about multiple events, rather than one
focal event, may help people moderate their affective forecasts.

To see if this effect would differ depending on whether the subsequent
events people thought of brought negative, positive, or neutral
emotions, Wilson et. al (2000) conducted another study similar to the
previous. In this study, people were still asked to complete diary
entries; however, one group was asked to think about future activities
with mixed connotations (e.g. socializing with friends, attending their
least favorite class, or cooking), whereas the other group was only
asked to think about neutral activities (e.g. cooking and watching TV).
For both groups, thinking about other activities was equally effective
in reducing affective forecasting errors. This demonstrates how thinking
about the emotional impact of subsequent events is not what reduces
affective forecasting errors, but rather that “people who think about
future events moderate their forecasts because they believe that these
events will occupy their thoughts and reduce thinking about the focal
event” (Wilson et. al., 2000). In other words, people who have multiple
events on their mind are less likely to overestimate the emotional
impact of a single event.

The effect of focalism is closely related to the *planning fallacy*, or
the idea that people often underestimate how long it will take them to
complete future tasks. One reason for this phenomenon is cognitive:
people tend to focus on the future task itself, overlooking or
minimizing their past experiences with similar tasks. Another reason is
motivation: people want to believe that they will be able to get their
task done efficiently, discounting potential obstacles to completing
their task. The planning fallacy is compounded by people’s tendencies to
focus on single events, as well as “wishful thinking” that they will be
able to put all their energy forth into a single task at hand.

## Loss Aversion

Biases in affective forecasting can also explain some aspects of loss
aversion. A study conducted by Kermer et. al revealed that people
predicted that their gambling losses would have a greater and longer
emotional impact than gambling gains, even when the loss and gain were
of the same magnitude. However, when they were asked how they felt later
on, their losses did not have as great an emotional impact as they had
initially forecasted. This again reflects a discounting of their
psychological immune system, as people underestimate their tendencies to
rationalize losses and overestimate their tendencies to dwell on their
losses.

## Retrospective Impact Bias

The principles of impact biases are simple - people tend to overestimate
the significance of events on their future emotional states. And,
because we as humans love being rewarded, we tend to have a general bias
to events that sparked positive emotions. Specifically, this impact bias
is reflected in a person’s exaggerated prediction of positive or
negative emotional responses to either positive or negative events
respectively. But, after a positive event people may actually not feel
as happy as they had predicted, or after a negative event people may
actually not feel as sad as they had predicted. People also predict
their future reactions to events based on learning from their past
reactions: retrospectively reflecting on previous incidence and perhaps
learning that one truly was not as unhappy as they had worried about a
particular event.

Wilson et al. (2003) concluded that such biases exist
because we consider events in isolation, and neglect to take into
account other factors or variables in our lives that might affect our
emotions shortly after or that might help us rationalize the events and
our emotions. Rationalization of events most significantly negates the
effects of retrospective impact bias, since we actively comprehend our
emotional response, good or bad, to particular events. Telling
ourselves, ‘this break-up did not hurt so bad, I was able to refocus my
time at the gym, and call my family more often,’ is comforting and
logically dampens the negative emotions from a break-up. This new
understanding would help us recalibrate our impact bias for future
events, limiting the over exaggerated predictions of our events.

But, this aforementioned learning, known as rationalized learning, in
the human psyche is limited, as described by Wilson et al. (2003). And,
retrospective bias is a vital feedback tool for our learning of what is
good or bad, what we enjoy or not so much, or what we believe is right
or wrong. Overestimation of future positive events is a motivator,
making rewards slightly larger to push one to keep working, while
overestimation of future negative events may drive a person’s reasonable
risk averse attitude. Fundamentally, impact bias is shaping our
personalities by reinforcing events we positively react to by repetition
and breaking down events we negatively react to.

## Changeability of Decisions

People love flexibility and generally avoid commitment when under
pressure to decide between choices. Given the option of changeability,
or an alternative set of decisions in which one can change their
decision a number of times before selecting, our choices suddenly become
much easier because changeability fulfills our need for flexibility.
Hence, when one is met with a choice, we immediately believe that we
will feel much more satisfied given a changeable option as we are
comforted by the notion that we are not committed if we stop feeling
happy. Perhaps, according to one of the hypotheses in Gilbert et al.
(2002), it is because the
additional flexibility makes us feel we have all the other options still
available to us.

However, when options are unchangeable and hard decisions are made by a
certain deadline, people’s true post-decision happiness is greater as we
feel more confident with the result. The implicit understanding that
one’s choice is final perhaps does two things - one rationalizes their
choice more thoroughly prior to the decision, and one settles into their
committed choice by comforting themselves that it was a good choice.
Hence, Gilbert et al. (2002) conclude that people overestimate their
happiness when presented with flexible choices and truly feel greater
happiness when committed to an unchangeable choice.

This juxtaposition of changeability offering pre-decision aspirations
for happiness while commitment offers true post-decision happiness is
exploitable, and executed by major retailers. In Gilbert et al. (2002),
they describe that by offering free returns on merchandise, no matter
how stringent their return policies may be, they entice customers to
shop with them rather than with their competitors who do not offer
returns. Having returns advertises the positive pre-decision emotions
associated with ‘flexibility,’ which is vital to shopping in which most
of the time is spent trying to make a decision in the pre-decision
phase. So, if one is to be more happy with a choice - resist the urge
for flexibility and ignore the options for changeability.

## Intensity Bias and Temporal Focus

The intensity of one’s emotional state in response varies with how
narrow or wide one’s perspective of the event is with relation to one’s
past states, conditions, and experiences, or their temporal focus: the
engagement with thoughts or events at a certain relative time point, a
focus that is narrow or wide, or in the past, present or future.

In their study, Buehler et al. (2001) found that people generally
demonstrate stronger emotions when an event is associated strongly to a certain time point than when the event is
associated with past experiences. When presented with a choice in the
future, not considering past experiences in their decision may generate
unrealistic positive aspirations and motivate people to pursue the wrong
goals, or it causes someone to over-worry about certain future negative
events.

And Buehler et al. (2001) observed that people often mispredict the
chronology of events - suggesting that their organization with respect
to past experiences is irrelevant and their temporal focus is narrowed
to an event and its time of occurrence. Hence, this limits our
capability of predicting accurately our emotional response to future
events.

## Miniquiz

Check your understanding of the concept of affective forecasting using this miniquiz: 

<span
class="s1"><https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1bK7OF-daKaNjrPy2saJcwcQTQFXKzpPt?usp=sharing></span>



## References

Buehler, R., & McFarland, C. (2001). Intensity Bias in Affective
Forecasting: The Role of Temporal Focus. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 27(11), 1480–1493. [<span
class="s2">https://doi.org/10.1177/01461672012711009</span>](https://doi.org/10.1177/01461672012711009)

Dunn, E. W., Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2003). Location, Location,
Location: The Misprediction of Satisfaction in Housing Lotteries.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(11), 1421–1432. [<span
class="s2">https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167203256867</span>](https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167203256867)

Gilbert, D. T., Pinel, E. C., Wilson, T. D., Blumberg, S. J., &
Wheatley, T. P. (1998). Immune neglect: A source of durability bias in
affective forecasting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
75(3), 617–638. [<span
class="s2">https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.75.3.617</span>](https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.75.3.617)

Gilbert, D. T., & Ebert, J. E. J. (2002). Decisions and revisions: The
affective forecasting of changeable outcomes. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 82(4), 503–514. [<span
class="s2">https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.82.4.503</span>](https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.82.4.503)

Kermer, D. A., Driver-Linn, E., Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2006).
Loss Aversion Is an Affective Forecasting Error. Psychological Science,
17(8), 649–653. [<span
class="s2">https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01760.x</span>](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01760.x)

Wilson, T. D., Wheatley, T., Meyers, J. M., Gilbert, D. T., & Axsom, D.
(2000). Focalism: A source of durability bias in affective forecasting.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(5), 821–836. [<span
class="s2">https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.78.5.821</span>](https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.78.5.821)

Wilson, T. D., Meyers, J., & Gilbert, D. T. (2003). “How Happy Was I,
Anyway?” A Retrospective Impact Bias. Social Cognition, 21(6), 421–446.
[<span
class="s2">https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.21.6.421.28688</span>](https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.21.6.421.28688)

  

  
