# Neuroforecasting

Annella Charee Tucker & Julia Lebovitz

Neuroforecasting research measures individual brain activity while
completing decision making tasks to forecast aggregate responses. For
our chapter, we plan to share a history of neuroforecasting, identify
key brain regions and circuits, and comment on ethical concerns.

For this chapter, we interviewed Professor Brian Knutson, one of the
pioneers and leading researchers in the Neuroforecasting field to better
understand the importance of his / the field’s research.

## Introduction to Neuroforecasting

In general to forecast is to make a statement about the future.
Neuroforecasting is seeking to make a statement about future choices
by analyzing the neural processes of individuals. This has been primarily 
accomplished by looking at brain circuits using fMRI. Neural data is
collected from an individual while making decisions, and this
information is used to forecast how an unrelated person will respond
in the same situation. Researchers are seeking to use individual
neural data to forecast aggregate choices.

The process that determines neural activity and the neural process
that describes decision making are both explored within
neuroforecasting. Functional magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI, is a
technology that detects blood flow. Increased blood flow to a region
of the brain indicates neural activity. Brian Knutson, the co-lead of the
NeuroChoice Initiative of the Stanford Wu Tsai Neurosciences
Institute has contributed to research using fMRI to scan the neural
activity of study participants watching online videos. Knutson
conducted neuroforecasting research intending to predict the
potential popularity of online videos. Study participants
simultaneously watched videos and were prompted by researchers with
questions about the video. Questions were formulated to expose the
participants' opinions of the video. These verbal responses did not
forecast the future popularity of videos, but brain responses did
(Kubota). “If we examine our subjects’ choices to watch the video or
even their reported responses to the videos, they don’t tell us
about the general response online. Only brain activity seems to
forecast a video’s popularity on the internet,” explained Knutson.
The key takeaway? Brain activity matters and can reveal more than
reported responses.

Brain activity reveals responses people are sometimes unable or
unwilling to share. Verbal responses are not always accurate or
insightful. The use of fMRI to gather data makes neuroforecasting
applicable to fields such as marketing and economics. The concept
actually evolved from neuroeconomics. Brain activity can predict the
extent to which someone likes a product or what option someone might
choose. A leading researcher in the field, Alex Genevsky predicted
that “...we are getting close to a time when biologically based and
neural measurements will play a significant role in mainstream
marketing.”

Neuroforecasting research suggests that consumer choice may be more
affectively-driven than reflective. It is important to note
limitations with neuroforecasting research, primarily the research
cited using fMRI technology. One major limitation comes with the
expense of fMRI technology. Due to the cost and long amounts of time
needed in the scanner, neuroimaging research has relatively small
sample sizes. Further, as the machine is immobile, neuroforecasting
research may not be able to actually replicate real-world
scenarios.

## Brain Regions and Circuits Associated with Consumer Choice

In this section, we will detail findings from individual
neuroforecasting studies as well as a systematic review to
demonstrate neural regions, and perhaps brain circuits, implicated
in this field.

![Image of relevant brain areas](images/neuroforecasting_areas.png)


Fig 1: Brief Overview of Brain Areas Implicated in Neuroforecasting
Research. More opaque regions (OFC and Insula) represent brain
regions that are deeper in the brain. Generated Brain Image is a
rough estimate to show a schema of literature findings. 
[neurosynth.org](http://neurosynth.org/) used to
generate model neural activity.

A landmark study in this field was conducted by Berns and
Moore (2012) who used fMRI to measure neural activity
when participants were exposed to different songs with the intent to
track popularity. Two years after the researchers measured brain
activity while listening to songs, they used brain activity and
“liking” ratings to predict which songs became a “hit.” They found
that while subjective ratings did not predict which songs may become
hits, nucleus accumbens (NAcc) activity did. The average song
likeability had significant path coefficients in both the
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and NAcc; while the NAcc and OFC path was
significant, only the NAcc predicted ‘liking.’ The medial prefrontal
cortex (mPFC) + NAcc activity forecasted aggregate downloaded songs
2 years later. Their research was one of the first to demonstrate
that neural activity may provide hidden information and could be
more reliable than self-report measures. 

Knutson and colleagues (2007) used event-related fMRI to measure
neural activity while individuals completed tasks related to gain
and loss anticipation. They found different brain regions correlated
with and predicted different aspects of individual consumer choice.
They found that: The nucleus accumbens (NAcc) activity was correlated
with product preference; insula activity occurred when participants
were exposed to excessive prices; the mesial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) activity preceded the purchase decision. These areas are
important leading up to the purchasing decision and activation
across the circuit occurs prior to an individual consumer’s
decision.

Falk, Berkman, and Lieberman (2012) showed participants different
ads from campaigns geared at quitting smoking to measure the
individual and population-level success of each advertising
campaign. They found that the mPFC was most highly correlated with
and predictive of both individual and aggregate behavior change to
stop smoking. The mPFC has also been found to be correlated with a
number of implicit preferences and judgements as well as
considerations of personally relevant future goals.

Tusche, Bode, and
Haynes (2010) measured neural activity and self-report liking in two
experimental groups – high attention and low attention – while
individuals were exposed to cars. Insula and mPFC activity predicted
consumer choice under both conditions, suggesting that these areas
are important in consumer choice even when an individual was not
closely attending to objects.

Kühn, Strelow, and Gallinat (2016) measured neural activity while
individuals viewed six different chocolate bars. NAcc activity was
associated with product preference. High prices were associated with
both increased insula activity and decreased mOFC activity. Insula
activity predicted a decision to not buy the product while NAcc and
mOFC activity predicted decisions to buy the product.

In a systematic review, Knutson and Genevsky found that in 8 studies
forecasting aggregate choice with functional MRI before 2017, the
NAcc, mPFC, or combination of the two regions acted as an aggregate
outcome forecaster. Further, the NAcc, mPFC, and amygdala helped to
forecast individual choice. This suggests that subcortical regions
(particularly the NAcc) coupled with cortical regions (particularly
the mPFC) are implicated in consumer choice. Their review indicated
that not all regions used to predict individual choice could also be
scaled to predict aggregate choice. They developed the
affect-integration-motivation (AIM) framework, which suggests that
neural signals are first effectively evaluated, then integrated, and
finally translated into a motivated choice to avoid or act. They
specifically expect that “neural signals from evolutionarily
conserved affective circuits are cortically integrated with
individual contextually relevant concerns and then relayed to motor
preparatory circuits that can support motivated choice behavior”
(112). As noted in the interview with Dr. Knutson, this circuit may
be considered motivational as the NAcc and mPFC are both innervated
by dopamine, a neurotransmitter important for wanting. Yet, more
studies are needed to fully elucidate this circuit and understand
*when* and *why* neuroforecsting works.

## Real-world applications of the research

In our interview with Dr. Knutson, he recognized a general lag
between this research and “real-world” applications. He commented
that he (and people he was worked with) have acted as consultants
for some marketing companies, but so far, to our knowledge this
research has not directly had real-world applications. This is
likely due to how new the field of neuroforecasting is. What this
research does show is that certain brain regions may be able to
predict both individual and aggregate choice. For example, Dr.
Knutson noted that images of smiling individuals may boost NAcc
activity. Neuroimaging may inform the economic and marketing fields
as it could provide insight into hidden information and perhaps why
people act *irrationally* at times.

The potential impact of neuroforecasting is interdisciplinary. Since
the birth of the field in 2010 with the article “A Neural Predictor
of Cultural Popularity” by Sarah Moore and Greg Berns studying
neural imaging to predict the popularity of songs, the prospect of
using neuroforecasting to sell has been at the forefront. A study
using Kickstarter, a crowdfunding platform, investigated the success
of project funding campaigns based on the neural responses of
investors. Brain activity proved to be a better indicator of project
funding success than reported responses of the study participants
(Genevsky et al., 2017). Marketers are seeking to get into the minds of their
consumers, and brain imaging allows them to understand
decision-making processes.

Another field to be implicated by neuroforecasting is economics.
Economists use models to explain patterns and trends, but these
models are sometimes limited by the assumption that humans are
‘rational’ beings. Neuroforecasting models may help uncover hidden
information that could help inform economic models.The intersection
of neuroforecasting and economics supports economists in building
models that take into account human behavior. While the intersection
of the two disciplines is interesting, an economist does not
necessarily have to become a neuroscience expert. “An economist who
examines neural variables would not necessarily require extensive
knowledge of neural processes; instead, he might simply rely on
neuroeconomics to identify and collect the relevant data.”
(Bernheim, 2013)

## Ethics Of Neuroforecasting

While neuroforecasting has interesting applications, it also has
potentially harmful implications. The insight brain imaging using
fMRI can offer is tremendous, and in the wrong hands could be
detrimental. One concern is how “sin” industries like alcohol and
tobacco could utilize forecasting. Knowledge about addiction can be
abused by the profit-driven industries and perpetuate addictions.
Industry in general and the commercialization of brain imaging is a
major issue as well. As marketing professionals discover how the
information can be applied in practice they will likely be
interested in developing in-house studies. Further, an individual’s
privacy is of concern as neuroforecasting suggests ‘hidden
information.’ However, using neuroforecasting to predict aggregate
outcomes and not individuals has tremendous marketing / economic
potential. 

## References

Berkman, E. T., & Falk, E. B. (2013). Beyond Brain Mapping: Using
Neural Measures to Predict Real-World Outcomes. *Current directions
in psychological science*, *22*(1), 45–50. [<span
class="s3">https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721412469394</span>](https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721412469394)
  

Berns, G. S., & Moore, S.
E. (2012). A neural predictor of cultural popularity. *Journal of
Consumer Psychology*, *22*(1), 154–160.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcps.2011.05.001

Bernheim, B.D. (2008). *Neuroeconomics: a sober (but hopeful)
appraisal*. AEJ: Microeconomics.
 
Falk, E. B., Berkman, E. T., & Lieberman, M. D. (2012). From neural
responses to population behavior: neural focus group predicts
population-level media effects. *Psychological science*, *23*(5),
439–445. [<span
class="s3">https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797611434964</span>](https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797611434964)

Genevsky, Alexander et al. “When Brain Beats Behavior:
Neuroforecasting Crowdfunding Outcomes.” *The Journal of
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience*
vol. 37,36 (2017): 8625-8634. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1633-16.2017

Knutson, B., & Genevsky, A. (2018). Neuroforecasting Aggregate
Choice. *Current directions in psychological science*, *27*(2),
110–115. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721417737877

Knutson, B., Rick, S., Wimmer, G. E., Prelec, D., & Loewenstein, G.
(2007). Neural predictors of purchases. *Neuron*, *53*(1), 147–156.
[<span
class="s3">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.11.010</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.11.010)

Kühn, S., Strelow, E., & Gallinat, J. (2016). Multiple “buy
buttons”in the brain: Forecasting chocolate sales at point of-sale
based on functional brain activation using fMRI.NeuroImage, 136,
122–128. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.021

Tusche, A., Bode, S., & Haynes, J. D. (2010). Neural responses to
unattended products predict later consumer choices. *The Journal of
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for
Neuroscience*, *30*(23), 8024–8031. [<span
class="s3">https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0064-10.2010</span>](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0064-10.2010)
