# The evolving field of neuromarketing

Isabel Dibble & Brandon Truong

As more and more portions of modern
life are built to revolve around commerce, marketing, and communication,
there is an increasing need to understand what is going on in the
interactions thereof. When you see an advertisement, you’re interfacing
with marketing stimuli that has been crafted to hopefully nudge you to
buy it. Although this pattern seems age-old, we are still at the
forefront of understanding how we interact with and are affected by
marketing. Neuromarketing has emerged and grown exponentially over the
past couple decades as a core intersection of business, decision-making,
and neuroscientific research, with large implications for both
businesses and consumers. We might define neuromarketing as “the
application of neuroscientific methods to analyse and understand human
behavior in relation to markets and marketing exchanges” (Cherubino
2019). In this chapter, we discuss the emerging field of neuromarketing
in-depth by describing the important methods used, its applications
through various use cases, prefaced by a review of its origins. We close
with an examination of the field’s ethical concerns and considerations,
as well as incoming future directions.

In order to understand the concept and scope of neuromarketing, it’s
helpful to first understand the fields of marketing and neuroscience
from which it emerges. Marketing refers to the processes of attracting
an audience to a product or service. Marketing as a business function is
considered to have 4 key components: Product, Price, Place, and
Promotion (The Marketing Book, 1987). Throughout all components, an
essential goal is identifying and understanding a target consumer’s
personality, desires, and needs. Therefore, market research is vital to
studying and analyzing consumers’ behaviors to produce a product to sell
at the right price and place. Lastly, understanding which platforms and
how to message the product or service with promotions is important to
capture consumers’ attention and convert their attention into sales of
the product or service. To gain insights into consumer behavior,
traditional marketing tools consist of conducting focus groups, surveys,
and other behavioral studies looking at measures like recognition,
recall, desirability/liking, persuasion, intent, attention, affect,
(Venkatraman 2015). Although these approaches have resulted in a growth
of understanding in the field of marketing, they primarily rely on
qualitative behavioral and self-reports. The field of neuroscience
offers itself as an appealing tool in uncovering components that affect
humans’ cognitive processes, that can aid in understanding the “why” and
“how” a consumer interacts or is attracted to a product.

In general, the goal of
neuroscience is to understand the brain by identifying structures and
the functions of those brain structures. Specifically through the
advancement of neuroimaging technology, neuroscience has opened a more
direct window into our brains by understanding the mechanisms underlying
our interactions with our environment. The application of understanding
our brain and its influence on human behavior has intrigued social and
behavioral sciences. We examine specific technologies in this field as
it pertains to neuromarketing in more depth in the Methods section.

*Neuromarketing* lies at the intersection of these seemingly separate
fields of marketing and neuroscience. While there are nuanced versions
of its definition, neuromarketing has emerged as a field to understand
the neural structures and functions that influence how humans engage
with marketing stimuli. Marketing stimuli can take the form of aspects
such as product attributes, price, availability, sales promotion, and
marketing communications (Lian 2016). In other words, neuromarketing
uses the tools of neuroscience and applies them to the problems and
questions in marketing. Although this chapter focuses on neuromarketing,
it is worth mentioning that neuroeconomics is a closely related field
that similarly looks at how neural mechanisms can inform and cause
economic decision making (Sanfey 2003). Depending on how you view
definitions of the fields, neuromarketing can be seen as a subfield of
neuroeconomics. By providing an understanding of marketing-related
decision-making at the neural level, the field enables another avenue in
adding a holistic understanding through the brain with regards to
behaviors we observe, that would otherwise be subject to subjectivity in
self-reports and the like from traditional approaches. Take an example
result like: a consumer exhibits likeness towards a product when
packaged in a certain color. Traditional methods might conclude with
this result, but a neuromarketing approach might in contrast take this
result and see what happens in the brain when this behavior is
exhibited, digging into the process by which this happens -- the how and
why, rather than just the behaviors themselves.

## Methods of neuromarketing

As stated in the introduction,
traditional tools in the marketing field have a limitation of relying on
people’s self-reports to describe their feelings and preferences towards
a product. The value of neuromarketing helps draw away from this
reliance on subjective, self-reports to provide measurements of how an
individual’s brain responds to a product. Some researchers in the
neuromarketing field like to describe neuroscientific methods uncovering
the “hidden” information our brain conveys in response to stimuli that
an individual may not be consciously aware of. This phrase of “hidden”
preferences is hotly debated among experts and while this chapter will
note the claims researchers make in neuromarketing experiments, more
understanding is needed to truly understand the brain mechanisms
responding to stimuli -- the correlative learnings we have do not
necessarily teach us real causative properties of “hidden” preferences.
For the goals of this paper, this section will instead broadly focus on
the popular neuroscientific tools used in the neuromarketing field
(Kottier, 2014).

The two main neuroscientific
methods used in neuromarketing are functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG). We will explain and compare
each of these methods below.

### Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)

When there is neural activity in a specific area of the brain, there is
an increase in the level of oxygenation in the blood in that area of the
brain. Thus, identifying regions of increased blood oxygen indicates
activity in the brain in response to a stimulus. The fMRI is able to
illustrate with high spatial resolution, an accurate depiction of an
activated brain region. This is helpful in terms of neuromarketing to
identify brain areas that are being activated in response to a product
(Kottier, 2014), as researchers can examine and correlate the areas of
the brain to a stimulus.

### Electroencephalography (EEG)

While the fMRI is advantageous
because of its ability to clearly display activated brain regions, EEG
is special in regards to its precise timing in capturing electrical
signals in the brain. Thus, EEG has a high temporal resolution, but low
spatial resolution. In the field of neuromarketing, EEG can be used to
discern *when* a person is responding to a product due to the electrical
signals firing and the EEG capturing those signals immediately (Kottier,
2014)

## What areas of the brain are important to understand for
neuromarketing?**

An exciting advantage with the emergence of neuromarketing is using
neuroimaging data such as fMRI and EEG to more accurately pinpoint
preferences of consumers. But where in the brain do researchers
study?

Neuromarketing relies heavily on the neuroscientific research
understanding the basic brain mechanisms that illustrate humans’
preferences, which is part of a larger research around *value-based*
decision making. Research has highlighted the ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFC) and ventral striatum as areas that consistently seem to
predict people’s preferences (Glimcher, 2013, p. 373). In the next
section of this chapter, a few experiments within the neuromarketing
field will be described that illustrate how measuring activity in these
two brain regions leads to predictions about people’s values on
goods.

## Use cases

As stated in the methods section, neuromarketing gleans neuroscientific
insights to learn how consumers react and feel towards products based on
neuroimaging reflecting activity in certain brain areas. In this section
of the chapter, various experiments will be discussed to provide a
better glimpse at the types of research conducted in the field of
neuromarketing.

To begin, a seminal paper that sparked more research in neuromarketing
is a study that examines the neural responses underlying behavioral
preferences for drinks. In this study, McClure et al. examined the
preferences for Coca Cola versus Pepsi in a blind test, while also
probing the influence of brands on behavioral preference for a product.
Using Coca Cola and Pepsi in this study is an interesting, unique choice
because these two brands actually have similar chemicals incorporated to
make their products, however, people have strong, explicit preferences
for one of the brands over the other. Therefore, the researchers were
curious to examine how exactly people neurally respond to these products
when they are not aware of what brand they are drinking versus when they
are aware. In the study, participants were lying in a fMRI scanner,
drinking Coca Cola or Pepsi (McClure et al., 2004).


The results from these two experiments suggest two, independent brain
areas involved in producing preferences. From the blind test, the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) activity indicated participants’
preferences for either Coca Cola or Pepsi. This finding reaffirms the
method of tracking activity in the vmPFC to determine people’s
preference for specific products. However, examining only sensory
information may not be enough to determine a person’s preference.
Cultural information has been found to be an influence on one’s
preference. Thus, the second experiment tested the influence of Coca
Cola’s brand in determining people’s behavior. In result, McClure et al.
found that brand knowledge, in this case the Coca Cola brand, biased
preference decisions, which was reflected in brain activity in the
hippocampus, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), and midrain. These
three brain areas seem to be separate from the vmPFC activity, since
vmPFC activity was found to be unaffected by the brand knowledge
(McClure et al., 2004). In summary, this paper identified distinct
neural responses to sensory and culture information when examining
behavioral preferences for Coca Cola versus Pepsi soda.


Another study worth describing sought to identify what kinds of
neurophysiological measures predict the success of advertisements. While
Venkatraman et al. review physiological measures such as eye tracking,
this chapter will focus on the comparisons Venkatraman et al. made
between fMRI and traditional measures used in advertising studies. The
authors specifically assessed certain measures that have been known to
relate to high-level constructs commonly studied in advertising
research. These main constructs are attention, affect, memory and
desirability. The study consisted of assessing participants’ reactions
to 30-second television advertisements. One goal of the study was to
identify regions in the brain that reflect key traditional advertising
measures of liking, purchase intent, and recognition (Venkatraman et
al., 2014).

A main result from the study found
activity in the dlPFC and vmPFC reflecting the liking measure. This
finding is consistent with other studies that argue liking represents
both cognitive and affective processes, which respectively is associated
with activity in the dlPFC and vmPFC brain regions. A broader takeaway
from this finding is that liking, in this case an advertisement,
produced activations in the dlPFC, and in result, the researchers are
making claims that liking is associated with brain areas that involve
cognitive processes. When identifying brain regions that tracked
recognition, the hippocampus had higher activitations. Because the
hippocampus is strongly associated with memory, the researchers in this
experiment infer that the signals from the hippocampus may relate to a
higher chance of remembering the stimulus, the advertisement, at a later
test. While this is the claim made in the paper, a caveat is that
inferring brain signals from a stimulus requires further investigations
before making strong conclusions.

When comparing the effects of
traditional and neurophysiological methods, the researchers used a
dependent variable of advertisement elasticity, which roughly measures
the effectiveness of an advertisement on influencing a percent change in
sales. An important note the researchers found is that traditional
measures explain most of the variation in advertisement elasticity as
these methods produced 72% of the adjusted R-squared variable in the
regressions (Venkatraman et al., 2014, p. 447). Therefore, this finding
reinforces the argument in this chapter of neurophysiological methods
not replacing traditional methods, but instead complimenting them. When
controlling for the traditional measures, researchers found fMRI a
significant predictor of advertisement elasticity as roughly 85% of the
variation is explained by this method (p. 448). Additionally,
researchers suggest that measures such as EEG and eye tracking could
still be useful in explaining the variance of advertisement elasticity.
In general, this paper and others support the future of neuromarketing
consisting of neurophysiological measures complementing traditional
measures in order to glean the best predictors to attract consumers and
convert them into buying a product (Venkatraman et al., 2014).

## Ethical and cultural implications

The onset of neuromarketing both as a research tool and a tool employed
in industry often brings up strong ethical concerns and cultural
implications.

One of the primary fears of neuromarketing is that of manipulation and
free will. Billions of dollars are spent on marketing every year:
dedicated efforts to figure out how to get consumers to purchase goods.
There is increasing awareness of the surveillance and potentially
manipulative processes that go behind commercial marketing. We can see
clear emotional feelings of consumers such as a targeted ad feeling too
intimate or “potentially dangerous”, and the opposite where one feels
not seen (e. g. being sent an ad that applies to a demographic unlike
yourself) (Ruckenstein, 2019). These sorts of feelings are likely the
root of the gut-reaction aversion to the idea of neuromarketing; if one
can understand what’s going on in my brain and how to affect it, perhaps
to the effect of buying something, that feels scary or unethical.
However, it is important to note that marketing research and practices
have understood ways to manipulate and coerce consumers to buy products
long before neuromarketing. These harmful possible effects,
manipulation, or collateral damages are from marketing and commercial
practices in general, not because of the onset of adding neuroscience to
the mix. Neuromarketing provides a more acute and holistic lens into how
these marketing practices function in relation to parts of the brain.

In the concerns of manipulation with regards to marketing and
neuromarketing, the idea of "Dark Patterns" (DP) is often mentioned. One
might define DP as "user interfaces that trick the users into doing
something they did not mean to do" (Di Geronimo 2020). Although this
concept is more heavily used in the context of design, user experience,
and human-computer interaction, neuromarketing findings can influence
practices in the fields thereof. For example, e-commerce websites will
use countdowns and limited offers to coerce users into buying products
(Di Geronimo 2020). The end-applications of DP are not limited to
commerce, but also games, social media, news, and more.

Murphy et. al. (2008) suggests that the concerns of neuromarketing lie
in two categories: "(1) protection of various parties who may be harmed
or exploited by neuromarketing and (2) protection of consumer autonomy."
Marketing and neuromarketing may be employed for manipulative,
exploitative, or invasive purposes. Although forms of neuromarketing are
perhaps being employed by bad-actors, research in the area allows us to
develop better understandings of people’s interactions with marketing
stimuli, and thus provides ways of knowing what is possible, what the
effects are, and how to combat dark patterns and manipulative practices
better. Understanding a potentially manipulative practice, like a
countdown timer on an e-commerce website (Di Geronimo, 2020), allows us
to combat or regulate the employment of it in practice. This is
especially helpful in that the public does not have a solid lens into
the inner-workings of private companies' marketing and neuromarketing
efforts -- we as consumers are almost always only at the
receiving/consuming (not creating) end of marketing stimuli.

There is also the notion that marketing applies to more than just large
companies marketing products to the public. With the new paradigm of
social media and influencer culture, where it is increasingly understood
that virtually anyone is or can have an influence on how you think,
purchase, or operate, even this consumer-focused lens of marketing is
nearly universal. Although something like an fMRI is expensive for a
solopreneur to use to market their online course or social media
presence, the better understanding we have in general across
neuromarketing can aid in informing, regulating, and ensuring
neurological safety across all forms of marketing.

## Conclusions and future directions

Although many important findings have been discovered, the field of
neuromarketing is still in early days. Measurements like fMRI and EEG
take precedence in many neuromarketing research endeavors. Many modern
approaches to developing our understanding of neurological behavior with
respect to marketing stimuli additionally tend towards a multi-faceted
tracking approach. It is likely we will see more studies where
understanding of consumer behavior is interpreted through a combination
of neurophysiological metrics (brain response, heart rate variability,
and eye tracking) (Guixeres 2017). Although neuromarketing has been
defined as being scoped to neuroscientific measures like brain response,
it might be the case that behaviors may best be understood through a
multi-faceted approach. Just as Duque-Hurtado et al. (2020) wrote, it is
apparent that "the objective of neuroscience applied to marketing is not
to replace traditional methods but rather to complement them."

Numerous more recent studies have begun to employ machine learning
applications to both the recognition and prediction of patterns
(Guixeres 2017) (Hossain 2019). The use of AI/ML approaches to
understand and mobilize findings has emerged over the past few years as
an important subset of neuromarketing research, likely due to increased
access to and creation of applicable data and computational resources.

Although we have not yet seen much neuromarketing research directly in
upcoming technologies like audio-based media platforms (podcasts,
Clubhouse, etc.), augmented reality, virtual reality, and gaming, we are
aware that marketing -- and thereby, neuromarketing -- can apply to all
of the above. We are already seeing some research being done in the
design of things like passive brain-computer interface applications
(Park, 2020). In the coming years, as these other technologies reach
higher popularity, that may not have had as much historical research
done, there will be an increasing need to understand how the plethora of
new marketing stimuli and formats function with people. Even though
observing new platforms is needed, just as said in the ethical
considerations above, there is still an enormous amount of research
needed to understand how existing and historical marketing
practices/behaviors/stimuli function or functioned. These motivations go
hand-in-hand with the development of new technologies, approaches, and
analyses.

In summary, the future of neuromarketing looks increasingly
multi-faceted and multi-disciplinary. As technologies improve, more
granular, accurate, and informed readings of brain measurements to the
effects of fMRI or EEG seem likely to be a core component of the field,
but the integration with AI/ML, physiological response measurement,
human-computer interaction -- and more -- provide an exciting frontier
for expansive investigation and learnings.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

## References

Di Geronimo, Linda, et al. “UI Dark Patterns and Where to Find Them: A
Study on Mobile Applications and User Perception.” Proceedings of the
2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 2020,
pp. 1–14. DOI.org (Crossref), doi:10.1145/3313831.3376600.

Duque-Hurtado, P., Samboni-Rodriguez, V., Castro-Garcia, M.,
Montoya-Restrepo, L. A., & Montoya-Restrepo, I. A. (2020).
Neuromarketing: Its current status and research perspectives. Estudios
Gerenciales, 525–539. https://doi.org/10.18046/j.estger.2020.157.3890

Kottier, W. G. (2014). The added value of neuromarketing tools in the
area of marketing research. 4 IBA Bachelor Thesis Conference. Published.
[<span
class="s1">https://essay.utwente.nl/66222/1/Kottier\_BA\_MB.pdf</span>](https://essay.utwente.nl/66222/1/Kottier_BA_MB.pdf)

Glimcher, P. W. (2013). Value-Based Decision Making. In Neuroeconomics:
Decision Making and the Brain: Second Edition (pp. 373-391). Elsevier
Inc.. [<span
class="s1">https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-416008-8.00020-6</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-416008-8.00020-6)
<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Guixeres, J., Bigné, E., Ausín Azofra, J. M., Alcañiz Raya, M., Colomer
Granero, A., Fuentes Hurtado, F., & Naranjo Ornedo, V. (2017a). Consumer
neuroscience-based metrics predict recall, liking and viewing rates in
online advertising. Frontiers in Psychology, 8.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01808

Hossain, M. S., & Muhammad, G. (2019). Emotion recognition using deep
learning approach from audio–visual emotional big data. Information
Fusion, 49, 69–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2018.09.008

McClure, S. M., Li, J., Tomlin, D., Cypert, K. S., Montague, L. M., &
Montague, P. (2004). Neural Correlates of Behavioral Preference for
Culturally Familiar Drinks. Neuron, 44(2), 379–387. [<span
class="s1">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.019</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.019)<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Murphy, E. R., Illes, J., & Reiner, P. B. (2008). Neuroethics of
neuromarketing. Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 7(4–5), 293–302.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cb.252

Ruckenstein, M., & Granroth, J. (2020). Algorithms, advertising and the
intimacy of surveillance. Journal of Cultural Economy, 13(1), 12–24.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17530350.2019.1574866

Park, S., Han, C.-H., & Im, C.-H. (2020). Design of wearable eeg devices
specialized for passive brain–computer interface applications. Sensors,
20(16), 4572. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20164572

Venkatraman, V., Dimoka, A., Pavlou, P. A., Vo, K., Hampton, W.,
Bollinger, B. K., Hershfield, H., Ishihara, M., & Winer, R. S. (2014).
Predicting Advertising Success Beyond Traditional Measures: New Insights
from Neurophysiological Methods and Market Response Modeling. SSRN
Electronic Journal. Published. [<span
class="s1">https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2498095</span>](https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2498095)<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

  

  
