# Sunk Costs in Consumer Decision Making

Melina Seligman-Tovar & Chelsea Trattner

This chapter will focus on the role of sunk cost in consumer decision
making. Sunk cost refers to a cost that has been incurred and cannot be
recovered, yet the impacts of this cost extend far beyond its initial
interpretation. We will begin our chapter by further defining sunk cost
generally. We will then move on to identifying many applications of sunk
cost, as the role of sunk cost is prevalent, yet different depending on
the context. Sunk cost comes to play in various scenarios, from large
purchases, to interpersonal relationships, and both small and major life
decisions. We will follow these applications with an explanation of the
interpersonal aspect of sunk cost, in which costs can be borne by
someone other than the decision-maker. This portion will be based on
“The interpersonal sunk-cost effect” paper by Christopher Olivola. We
will then delve into sunk cost’s relationship to theories including
“foot-in-the-door” and “low-ball” techniques, as well as cognitive
dissonance theory. Then, we will examine the rational justification of
committing sunk cost fallacy to understand why a decision maker may
continue with a failed plan. Next, we will examine a study that focuses
on sunk cost and customer brand loyalty to explore another mechanism
that may contribute to a customer’s decision to stay or leave a company.
The final section of this chapter will provide a mechanism to attenuate
the sunk cost effect through positive affect. This will allow us to
further elucidate the role of sunk cost as it applies to many social
situations and decision making processes, and provide an understanding
of how the effect can be mitigated.

## What is Sunk Cost?

The sunk cost effect can be defined as the tendency of individuals to
continue pursuing a certain endeavor once they have made some sort of
investment into the endeavor. This investment can take various forms,
some of which include money, time, and effort. The investment causes
individuals to continue their plan, regardless of whether it is truly
beneficial for them. The psychological mechanism of the sunk cost effect
stems from the desire to avoid feeling wasteful (Arkes and Blumer, 1985,
p. 125). People tend to fixate on their previous investments as opposed
to focusing on what will maximize their utility.

The specific investments that create the sunk cost effect should
ultimately have no influence on the individual’s decision, as these sunk
costs from past investments are irrelevant to future decisions. The
costs have already been incurred, and a truly rational decision maker
should not feel guilty about or be impacted by any previous costs. The
only factors that should influence their decision are those in the
immediate foreground or in the future. As we will reveal in the
following sections, the maladaptive behavior motivated can have
substantial, yet avoidable consequences on decision makers.

We will now delve into a few scenarios of the sunk cost effect in play,
to give a better idea of its many forms and outcomes. These examples
elucidate the fact that the sunk cost effect can apply to various
domains, and thus is a salient behavior to learn about and consider.

Take a girl named Grace who just received tickets to a 4-hour outdoor
concert. Now say that Grace convinces her friend to purchase a ticket,
at a full \$20, in order to accompany Grace to the concert. Both girls
are very excited, and greatly looking forward to seeing some of their
favorite artists. However, two days before the concert, the girls find
out that there will be a huge hail storm throughout the day of the
concert. Fortunately, the concert will still happen (attendees are
simply advised to bring umbrellas). Grace tells her friend that she will
not go, as she doesn’t want to suffer through a concert in a hail storm.
Her friend tells her that they must go, since she spent \$20 dollars for
the ticket. Arkes and Blumer would say that this friend is not acting in
a rational manner based on traditional economic theory (Arkes and
Blumer, 1985, p.125).

This is because, as previously mentioned, the only aspect that should
influence decisions is incremental costs, not sunk costs. The \$20 is
already a sunk cost that can not be recovered whether the friend attends
the concert or not, and thus the money should not influence Grace’s
friend’s decision. Rather, the idea of suffering through a 4-hour
outdoor hail storm should deter the friend from attending, just as it
did for Grace. In this example, the friend ends up going by herself and
continues the costly endeavor, as the sunk cost of \$20 provided her a
strong enough motivation to continue. Grace’s friend sacrificed her
happiness and potentially her health for four hours just to make the
cost of the ticket not appear wasted.

The irrational influence of sunk cost is evident with a simple fictional
example, but it has also been prevalent throughout history. One example
identified by Arkes and Blumer (1985) is that of the Tennessee-Tombigbee
Waterway Project. A substantial amount of taxpayers’ money was allocated
to and spent on the project. However, many of the individuals involved
in the project were insisting that it should not be completed. This
opposition did not fare well, as the sunk costs of the taxpayers' money
substantially outweighed the criticism of the project. Regardless of the
large sum of money in this historical example, sunk costs are not
relevant when making current decisions, and should not be considered in
the determination of stopping or continuing any endeavor (Arkes and
Blumer, 1985, p. 126). Thus if people had determined that the project
should not continue, the previous costs involved in the initial aspects
of the project should have no impact on the final decision to continue
or terminate the project (though other influences could come into play).

One final example that we will consider is that of the sunk cost effect
within relationships. Indeed sunk costs take many forms beyond the
classic monetary form discussed in the examples above. Take a couple
that met their freshman year of high school. They stayed together
through all of high school largely because of their bond, but also
because of the convenience of seeing each other in their classes, at
lunch, in the halls, and on multiple local weekend adventures. The
couple comes to their senior year of high school and are both heading to
colleges. One of them is going to a college in New York, while the other
will be attending a college in LA. The couple knows that they will both
be miserable in a long distance relationship. However, they decide to
stay together because they have already invested so much time, effort,
and money into their relationship. This couple that ultimately knows
they should be apart continues their relationship due to the influence
of the sunk cost effect.

## Interpersonal Sunk Cost

The previous examples indicate the ways in which the sunk cost effect
can impact the decision makers themselves. However, costs can also be
borne by individuals other than the original decision maker. In fact,
people often tend to alter their own choices based on other peoples’
past investments. This possibility was outlined in Oliviola’s (2018)
study.

The paper contained eight experiments in which two key factors were
varied. One was the presence (or size) of the sunk cost, and the second
was whether the decision maker themselves or another individual incurred
the sunk cost before the decision was made. In one of the experiments,
the following imaginary scenario was introduced: The participant was
told that they had obtained a 6-month membership to a tennis club that
either they had paid for or their friend had paid for. Unfortunately,
the participant recently sprained their arm, making playing tennis
incredibly painful for them. Participants were told either that their friends
had purchased the membership for \$900 (sunk cost), or that they had received the
membership for free (no sunk cost). They were then asked to indicate
whether they would continue to play tennis regardless of the pain or
stop playing until the injury improved. Participants also knew that
playing would only make their injury worse.

The results of this experiment revealed that individuals who had
received the membership from their friend who had purchased it for a
high cost were far more likely to go with the uncomfortable option than
if their friend had received the membership for free. Despite the
knowledge that there was no monetary cost for the individual themselves
in either scenario, the presence of the interpersonal sunk cost effect
is evident. Sunk cost can be borne by others, beyond the initial person
making the investment. This fact can be seen in various contexts and has
various implications for decision making.

## Sunk Cost Relation to Other Theories

The sunk cost effect can be related to various other theories, although
there are a few notable differences. The “Psychology of Sunk Cost” paper
by Arkes and Blumer (1985) highlights a few of these theories, which
will be further discussed below.

The first two theories related to sunk cost are the
“foot-in-the-door-technique” and “low-ball technique”. These techniques
note that when one starts off with a small request, an individual will
be far more likely to comply with a larger request. An example of the
low-ball technique would be a student convincing their parent to buy
them a gift card for \$25, then realizing that the giftcard is only
available at a minimum of \$50. The initial agreement makes their parent
substantially more likely to make the larger purchase. The
foot-in-the-door technique is similar, yet it convinces people to follow
through with *related* activities as opposed to the *same* activity. For
example, one could ask someone to sign a petition to support a local
Girl Scouts troop, then the individual will be far more likely to agree
to place a Girl Scout bumper sticker on their car. These techniques are
similar to the sunk cost effect in that prior commitments bear a great
influence on future purchases. However, a key difference between the
sunk cost effect and the two techniques is that these two techniques 
focus on compliance as their main dependent measure (Arkes and Blumer, 1985,
p. 138), whereas compliance does not usually play a role in the sunk cost
effect.

Another theory similar to the sunk cost effect is cognitive dissonance
theory. This theory indicates that when an individual expends
substantial effort on a task they tend to revalue the task more highly.
This means that individuals are more likely to continue spending and
allocating effort on a certain task once a large amount of effort has
been made. This is very similar to the sunk cost effect. However,
cognitive dissonance theory would predict that an individual would enjoy
the outcome of their work more than those who did not suffer to achieve
the same outcome, while the sunk cost effect often dictates that people
will go through with uncomfortable situations when previous investments
have been made.

The “foot-in-the-door” and “low-ball” techniques as well as cognitive
dissonance theory resemble many similarities to the sunk cost effect.
However, there are notable differences between the two that make each
theory unique and applicable to different contexts.

## Role of Sunk Cost in Decision to Stay or Leave a Subscription Product/Service

Sunk cost is a widely studied variable because it is so dynamic. Based
on the decision at hand, sunk cost can encompass many factors such as
time, money, and effort to varying degrees. The purpose of the following
section is to take a deep dive into a few of the mechanisms involved in
considering sunk cost with consumer choice. Because much academic
research focuses on the impact of invested time and money with sunk
costs, we examine two illuminating studies that explore the rational
reasons for sunk cost and the impact of customer loyalty on the decision
to leave or stay with a company. Due to the immense variety of decisions
that we face, we would like to focus specifically on a consumer’s
decision to stay or leave a subscription-based service. This
service/product can be one of various things: food delivery platform,
software-as-a-service (SaaS) platform, music subscription, fitness service, etc. 
We believe this
addresses a gap in current sunk cost and consumer choice literature.
Research lacks discussion on the impact of sunk cost on a service that
has such a unique temporal element. With subscription services, there is
no “completion” to the service. Rather, there is a completion to the
allotted time for the subscription, at which the decision maker can
decide to continue or terminate the subscription.

A study from Bornstein and Chapman (1995) investigates the rational
justifications for a decision maker to commit the sunk cost fallacy. A
decision maker commits sunk cost fallacy when they decide to continue a
service with a reason based on irrecoverable investments such as time or
money (Sunk Cost - Why You Should Ignore Them, n.d.). Bornstein and
Chapman conducted a study where participants examined a series of
scenarios and then gave a response to either continue the original plan
or switch (Bornstein & Chapman, 1995). From the experiments, the authors
found that participants had a few rational reasons as to why they
decided to continue the original plan. I will now explain these reasons
and how they relate to a customer's decision to stay or leave a
subscription service.

Bornstein and Chapman found that a common rational justification was the
learn-a-lesson argument. In this argument, we view a decision maker as
both a teacher and a learner. The decision maker reasons that they are
continuing with a failed plan because they believe it will teach them a
lesson to think more critically about their future decisions (Bornstein
& Chapman, 1995). The logic lies in that when sticking with a failed
plan, the decision maker is reminded of the consequences of their poor
decision (Bornstein & Chapman, 1995). Let’s consider the following
example to relate this argument to a subscription service. Bill decided
to purchase his local online newspaper’s basic subscription for \$3
every month for one year. After one week, he found a state news source
he likes much more than the local paper. Instead of purchasing a new
subscription to the state paper, he decides to continue with the local
paper for the remainder of the month in order to teach himself a lesson.
Next time, he promises to be more thorough when investigating other
providers before committing to a subscription. If Bill had purchased a
subscription to the state news source knowing that the \$3 spent were
irrecoverable, the lesson he learned may not be as strongly
reinforced.

Another reason to continue with a failed service is to appear as a good
decision maker. Bornstein and Chapman found that participants attributed
an increased importance for this as the investment of the decision
increased (Bornstein & Chapman, 1995). By making the decision to leave a
company or switch to another provider, a decision maker can feel as
though it is an admission that the initial decision was poorly made
(Bornstein & Chapman, 1995). Let’s examine how this rational
justification can be seen in a subscription service setting. An IT
employee selects a document signing provider for their company. This
person spent ample time doing their research. Due to the necessity of
signing and transferring documents virtually, this was an important
decision for the firm. In a few months, the IT employee discovers a
superior service to the one they had originally selected. This
alternative service will enable the firm to also fax and upload
documents into a single portal at the same cost of the original service.
Rather than switch to the superior service, the IT employee decides the
company will continue with the original one in order to protect their
initial decision. Since it is their job to select these tools, the IT
employee wants to appear as a good decision maker to those who hired
them.

Through the work of Bornstein and Chapman, we can see why decision
makers fall subject to the sunk cost fallacy beyond just the
consideration of the investment of time and money in the
service/product. In this next section, we will dive deeper into the role
of sunk cost in consumer choice. In the decision to leave a service,
there is another important factor to consider: customer loyalty. A study
by Steinman and Jacobs (2015) investigates the relationship between sunk
cost and customer-brand loyalty. The experiment assigned 108 students to
one of six conditions that focused on sunk cost, consumer-brand
relationship, and availability of product alternatives. After the
participants read news articles about their brand, they were measured on
consumer attitude, brand relationship and behavioral intent (Steinman &
Jacobs, 2015). The findings in the study supports that a high sunk cost
caused participants to be less likely to leave the brand. Furthermore,
when a violation of customer-brand relationship was present,
participants with high sunk costs indicated hesitancy to switch to an
alternative company (Steinman & Jacobs, 2015). In the case where sunk
cost was low, participants who experienced a brand violation were more
likely to switch to an alternative in comparison to participants with
high sunk cost and an absence of brand violation (Steinman & Jacobs,
2015).

Let’s address these findings in the following example. Consider Stacy
who has been a member of a workout app for several months. In addition
to various workouts, she also utilizes the meal plan organization
feature provided through the app. Stacy sees a news article that
expresses a controversial stance regarding the app. Stacy considers her
investment in the app too high for her to switch to another workout
service. The investment she feels is beyond a monetary one, she feels
connected to her instructors, the app stores her favorite meals, and her
profile has tracked her fitness journey. However, Stacy reflects that if
she had learned this news in the early stages of her experience with the
app, she would have switched to another service.

Through exploring the rational justifications of sunk cost and impact of
customer-brand relationship, we can see how sunk cost impacts our
decision-making process in many ways. There is much more that can be
further explored regarding the role of sunk cost in the decision to stay
or leave a subscription product/service. These insights are not only
useful for decision makers, but also for consumer-focused companies. For
a company, understanding sunk cost can help efforts to retain customers,
which is critical for growth and revenue. For decision makers, having
awareness of sunk costs’ mechanisms can facilitate their
decision-making.

## Attenuating the Impact of Sunk Cost Using Positive Affect

From miniscule daily decisions to vast historical decisions, the sunk
cost effect pushes decision makers to follow through with their
decisions despite negative circumstances. It may seem as if the sunk
cost effect can have unavoidable negative impacts in various situations.
In part, this is true. Even some of the most efficient and knowledgeable
decision makers continue to experience the sunk cost effect in their
daily lives. Fortunately, the sunk cost effect can in fact be mitigated
through the use of positive affect. The following section will delineate
the theoretical background behind the use of positive affect in
attenuating the impact of sunk cost. It will then delve into a study
that provides evidence for the beneficial possibilities of positive
affect as well as a discussion of additional mechanisms.

### Theoretical Background of Positive Affect

To begin, positive affect has demonstrated various beneficial effects on
individuals outside of decision-making. The paper, “Let It Go: Positive
Affect Attenuates Sunk Cost Bias by Enhancing Cognitive Flexibility'' by
Kyle Emich and Jin Pyone (2018) highlights the fact that positive affect
“cues more diverse and extensive thoughts and associations, creating a
more complex and broader context for cognitive activity” (Emich & Pyone,
2018, p. 579). People with positive affects can find common properties
between various stimuli and consider the world from multiple
perspectives. When individuals foster a positive outlook, they are more
likely to perceive the world through a more open and diverse
perspective. Research shows that people with positive affect tend to be
able to solve problems creatively, as they do not become fixated on
their initial solution. Evidently, there are many benefits associated
with a positive affect that can be applied to creativity as well as
one’s general outlook of the world.

All of the beneficial impacts of positive affect can translate to
improvements in decision making. In fact, those with a positive affect
have an increased “attention to disparate stimuli related to a focal
problem and ability to appropriately weigh the applicability of that
information” (Emich and Pyone, 2018, p. 580). With this ability, their
integration of information becomes far more efficient. In fact, Emich
and Pyone (2018) note that people with positive affects perform better
on Duncker’s Candle task, which requires participants to overcome
functional fixedness. The sunk cost effect is rooted in the fact that
individuals do not properly weigh the benefits and detriments of a
decision once they have made a prior investment in the decision.
Evidently, positive affect can provide a natural way of avoiding sunk
cost effect by enhancing cognitive flexibility and enforcing a focus on
relevant factors. Positive affect allows people to view decisions from
multiple perspectives leading to more informed and beneficial decisions,
as people become less fixated on previous investments. In this way,
individuals can determine what the best course of action would be based
on a focused understanding of the relevant factors involved, as opposed
to becoming fixated on the previous costs incurred.

  
### Experiments Displaying Impact of Positive Affect on Sunk Cost Bias

The sunk cost effect can be mitigated through the use of positive
affect. An individual’s positive affect refers to their tendency to
experience the world around them through a positive perspective.
Meanwhile, those with a neutral affect are not swayed by a positive
perspective or preference, and their future decisions are more likely to
be influenced by previous time and money investments (Emich & Pyone,
2018, p. 583). The beneficial use of positive affect is suggested by two
experiments delineated in the Emich and Pyone (2018) paper that display
the sunk cost effect on time and money, as well as the influence of
positive affect on the sunk cost effect. The results of the experiments
elucidate the drastic impact that an individual's affect can have on
their decisions.

The first experiment in the paper focused on a scenario that involved
sunk money. The experiment was based on a questionnaire adapted from the
Arkes and Blumer (1985) paper on sunk cost, which was referenced
earlier. In the experiment, 150 participants from an introductory
business class were shown one of two video clips, *Penguin Olympics* or
*Sticks* (Emich & Pyone, 2018, p. 581). The first clip was meant to
induce a positive affect, while the second option was meant to induce a
neutral affect. An index measure was created in order to assess the
state of the participants’ affective state before proceeding. The
students were then asked to make a decision involving an investment
regarding an airplane project. They were provided the following
scenario:

>As the president of an airline company, you have invested 10 million
dollars of the company’s money into a research project. The purpose was
to build a plane that would not be detected by conventional radar, in
other words,a radar-blank plane. When the project is 90% completed,
another ﬁrm begins marketing a plane that can not be detected by radar.
Also, it is apparent that their plane is much faster and far more
economical than the plane your company is building. The question is:
should you invest the last 10% of the research funds to ﬁnish your
radar-blank plane?” (Emich & Pyone, 2018, p. 582).

The participants' responses were then recorded. In order to measure each
participant’s positive affect, the researchers conducted a logistic
regression in which participants’ decisions to invest were regressed
onto their “affect condition, sunk cost involvement, and the interaction
between the two” (Emich & Pyone, 2018, p. 582). The results showed that
those in the positive affect condition tended not to recommit to the
project, while those not in the positive affect condition were 73% more
willing to commit to the project despite the evident drawbacks.

This impact of positive affect on decision making is additionally shown
in studies involving sunk time and sunk effort, proving that positive
affect can have a beneficial impact across various contexts. 

The chart below displays the responses from the students who decided to
commit to the investment in each experiment, separating them by the
affect condition they were in. The high blue bars indicate the
substantially higher likelihood for individuals to invest in a decision
when they do not foster a positive affect. Without a positive affect,
these individuals are far more likely to fall prey to the sunk cost
effect. Those in the positive affect condition, displayed with the green
bars, show a much lower likelihood to make the investments despite sunk
money, time, or effort. The impact of a positive affect varies only
slightly across the three different experiments.


![example of sunk cost](images/sunkcost.png)
*This chart shows people’s decisions to follow through with a decision
or investment due to the sunk cost effect, which is mitigated in the
positive affect condition (in green).*

## Conclusion

The sunk cost effect is evident in various studies and across various
fictional, historical, and routine scenarios. The sunk cost effect
causes individuals to follow through with decisions despite the
knowledge that the decision might not be beneficial, simply because
there was already an investment of time, money, or effort, as well as
many other factors. Our research aims to contribute to the information
surrounding the impact of sunk cost on a customer’s decision to leave a
subscription based service. We hope to provide interesting insights into
how the mechanisms underlying sunk costs are present in the many
services we use. The implications of the sunk cost effect can be
substantial, however, a positive affect can be used to combat it.
Employing a positive affect allows individuals to see their decisions
through multiple perspectives, and weigh their decisions in a less
fixated manner. Through reading this chapter, one can understand the
definition of the sunk cost effect, its application in multiple domains,
and the ways in which its impact can be mitigated.

## References
  

Arkes, Hal R, and Catherine Blumer. “The Psychology of Sunk Cost.”
*Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes*, vol. 35, no. 1,
1985, doi:10.1016/0749-5978(85)90049-4.

  

Bornstein, B. H., & Chapman, G. B. (1995). Learning lessons from sunk
costs. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied,* *1*(4), 251-269.
doi:10.1037/1076-898x.1.4.251

Emich, Kyle J., and Jin Seok Pyone. “Let It Go: Positive Affect
Attenuates Sunk Cost Bias by Enhancing Cognitive Flexibility.” *Journal
of Consumer Psychology*, vol. 28, no. 4, 2018,
doi:10.1002/jcpy.1030.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Olivola, Christopher Y. “The Interpersonal Sunk-Cost Effect.”
*Psychological Science*, vol. 29, no. <span class="Apple-tab-span">
</span>7, 2018, doi:10.1177/0956797617752641.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Steinman, R., Dr, & Jacobs, E. (2015). Sunk Cost Effects on Consumer
Choice. *Sunk Cost Effects on Consumer Choice,* *4*, 11th ser., 25-30.

Sunk cost - why you should ignore them (the sunk cost fallacy). (2021,
February 03). Retrieved May 24, 2021, from
https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/knowledge/economics/sunk-cost/\#:~:text=The%20sunk%20cost%20fallacy%20reasoning%20states%20that%20further,when%20deciding%20whether%20to%20continue%20with%20the%20activity.

  