# Hindsight Bias

Skyler Jones & Celeste Wijnbelt

“I knew that they’d win that game,” you say after the final buzzer has
sounded. Despite your confidence in your comment, your initial thoughts
*beforehand* were that there was a 50/50 chance that the team would
actually win. So why, after the fact, or in hindsight, were you so
confident in your statement? Why was the unforeseen suddenly
foreseeable? We often quickly believe that the known information we have
gathered was obvious. We knew it would happen all along. But did we?

This “knew it all along” phenomenon is more commonly known as hindsight
bias, the tendency for people to believe that they could have accurately
predicted the outcome of a past event. Studies reveal three primary
forms of hindsight bias: memory distortion, inevitability, and
foreseeability (Roese, 2012). In memory distortion there is a
focus on the falsely gathered understanding of earlier judgement; in
other words, the individual “said it would happen.” Inevitability refers to 
a belief that the past was predetermined; the individual
believes “it had to happen.” Finally, in foreseeability the
individual attributes the outcome to their inherently subjective belief
of personal ability and knowledge; they “knew it would happen.”
Combining all three levels, hindsight bias stretches across a range of
situations, making it very common.

Hindsight bias occurs across all age groups and is a robust phenomenon
that can have significant consequences related to judgement and decision
making in the future based on past assumptions. In adults, hindsight
bias has been shown to impact decision making in a wide range of areas
ranging from medical and legal decisions to minor judgements of personal
experiences. In each case, the decision maker, backed by knowledge of a
certain outcome, overestimates the likelihood of said outcome. 

Early studies conducted by Baruch Fischhoff
(1975) suggest that a strong component of hindsight bias is “creeping
determinism,” a term used to describe the tendency for individuals to
deem observed outcomes as inevitable (Fischhoff, 1975). The reasoning
behind this is the propensity for individuals to flatter themselves, so
to speak, by claiming that they knew something was to happen all along,
though only spoken after the fact. Overconfidence, therefore, is a
significant contributor to hindsight bias, as it can often lead
individuals to perceive their judgments as more knowledgeable than they
actually are.

## Components of Hindsight Bias

### Theory of Mind

Some scholars believe that hindsight bias is the result of the brain
rendering old information inaccessible after updating with newly
acquired information (Fischhoff, 1975), while other accounts maintain
that hindsight bias occurs due to a biased restructuring of the
beginning situation, where the outcome is the cue (Pohl). Another
suggestion, however, is that hindsight bias could stem from another
phenomenon: theory of mind (Bernstein et al.,
2007). Theory of mind (ToM) is the ability of individuals to attribute mental
states and conclusions of situations to others and themselves, serving
as a cornerstone of interactions between people. Another critical thing
to note about ToM is its sparsity among children.
Children below the age of 4 often have difficulty understanding that
others experience things different from their own reality (Bernstein,
2007), which is oftentimes revealed by ‘false belief tests.’ Bernstein
notes that hindsight bias appears to be similar to trends in ToM studies
of children; in both, the participant learns that their belief of a
situation was incorrect and must concurrently reapproach and re-evaluate
their prior naive belief or that of another ‘naive’ individual.
Essentially, adults making biased decisions after the fact (hindsight
bias) share similarities to children making biased judgements based on
ToM trends. The difference, however, lies in the certainty of the
decision being made. Where children hold on to their beliefs of a
certain outcome through their lack of theory of mind, adults have a
limited commitment to their biased outcomes in decisions with hindsight
bias. With that in mind, it becomes clear that children might grow out
of decision bias associated with theory of mind (as they develop more
ToM with age), whereas hindsight bias is a lifelong cognitive fault,
perhaps playing a role in other judgments as well. Additionally, it
might be more appropriate to view hindsight bias as a continued yet
altered version of theory of mind biases in children, a representation
of “false hunches'' or “false judgments” based on tasks, rather than
“false beliefs'' that children retain (Bernstein, 2007). While there is
still much to be learned about the interconnectedness between hindsight
bias and other judgement and decision-making processes, it is clear that
these types of biases in judgement persist throughout whole lives, not
just occurring in one stage. However, the similarities between hindsight
bias and theory of mind reveal that the sparsity of theory of mind in
children could be an origin of the persistent hindsight bias we see in
all age groups.

### Cognitive Dissonance

Hindsight bias holds several parallels to cognitive dissonance.
Cognitive dissonance is the uncomfortable feeling that is thought to
occur when an individual does something that is inconsistent with his or
her internal values (Debono, 2019). To resolve the dissonance, one will
adjust their beliefs to be consistent with their behavior. Consider this
example: a woman purchases an expensive designer sweater. A month after
the purchase the woman decides that she doesn’t like the sweater all
that much anymore, and decides to return it. However, the store claims
that the return window has closed, and the woman can only get half-price
back for the sweater. As a result, the woman convinces herself that she
does like the sweater afterall and decides to keep it. The dissonance in
this situation occurs when the woman chose to keep the sweater even
though she didn’t particularly like it. To mitigate the dissonance, she
convinced herself that she does, in fact, like the sweater.

This series of decisions is reflected in Alafair S. Burke’s paper
*Improving Prosecutorial Decision Making: Some Lessons of Cognitive
Science,* which stated “the desire to avoid cognitive dissonance can cause
people to adjust their beliefs to maintain existing self-perceptions”
(Burke, 2005). Similar to hindsight bias, cognitive dissonance aims to
bring one’s beliefs and actions into balance. As humans, we want to
believe that our actions reflect our internal values-- 
and when this is not the case, we
do everything in our power to realign them (Burke, 2005). While
cognitive dissonance and hindsight bias hold many similarities, a few
key differences must also be mentioned. Cognitive dissonance occurs
concurrently with the decision making process, and pushes one to change
their thoughts and feelings about a particular decision as they make it.
However, hindsight bias mainly takes place once the decision has already
been made. While cognitive dissonance leads to changes in one’s thoughts
and decisions in the present moment, hindsight affects how one reflects
on the past. In whole, the comparison of these two phenomena have
allowed us to gain a better understanding of our decision making
processes, and will continue to be useful as we discover the potential
problems that can arise under these biases.

## The Problem of Hindsight Bias

The consequences of hindsight bias can hinder our ability to effectively
gather information and learn from it. Fischhoff proposes that
unrecognized hindsight bias can hinder us from effectively judging the
past and learning from it (Fischhoff, 1975), which highlights the
potential negative impact that hindsight bias can have on our overall
judgment and decision making. It is the outcome knowledge that ‘tricks’
individuals into believing they know what the past was about, when in
reality, they learned nothing from it. In the words of Roese and Vohs,
“hindsight bias can be confused with simple learning from experience.”
The so-called ‘decision trap’ of hindsight bias reveals two primary
consequences: a myopic attention to a sole cause of a past event and
skewed overconfidence in personal judgements (Roese, 2012). The myopia
from hindsight bias involves a failure to accurately pinpoint the cause
of a problem. This is the result of either a hyperfocus on a false cause
or an exaggeration of the impact of the actual cause (that might not be
the actual cause again). In real terms, this can lead to “placing more
blame on a particular individual than is warranted,” and not recognizing
a lapse in personal judgement of a problem. Overconfidence, however, is
related more to an exaggeration of trust in a personal ability to
analyze a problem and make an educated decision. As a result,
individuals may overlook other potential perspectives, which leads to
adopting risky positions in future decision making. Overconfidence from
hindsight bias creates a reluctance to adopt a different approach or
perspective on an issue, since the individuals who ‘knew it all along,’
feel like there is no reason to consider any other perspectives.
Consequently, the individual learns less or--in some
cases--nothing.
  
## Ways to debias

Hindsight bias often involves people, who already know the true outcome
of an event, believing that the event was relatively inevitable. As a
result, one of the most common ways to combat hindsight bias is to argue
against the reported outcome and attempt to convince oneself that the
event could have had a different end result (Gilovich,
Griffin & Kahneman, 2002). When a subject argues against the
reported outcome of an event, they are concurrently reminding themselves
of their original thinking patterns. This process will naturally combat
hindsight bias, as it allows one to rediscover their previous argument.
However, this technique is not always effective. If one has a hard time
coming up with ideas that oppose the reported outcome, the process can
be counterproductive. Across his studies, Nobert Schwarz found that when
the ease of accessibility to these alternative options decreases-- or if
people struggle to accumulate ideas-- they take this as meaning there
are not many examples to be generated (Sanna & Schwarz, 2003) . This
process plays off of Tversky and Khaneman’s availability heuristic. 
If one has a hard time coming up
with ideas that oppose the outcome, the process can backfire and they
will be more engulfed in their biased thinking patterns than before and
believe to an even greater extent that the outcome was inevitable.

## Social Applications

As discussed previously, hindsight bias can be apparent in both
professional and academic settings. Whether it be a doctor trying to
recall why they made a certain diagnosis, or a historian putting
themselves in the shoes of a historical figure, it is essential to be
able view a decision with foresight and not be swayed with the actual
outcome. By analyzing a decision without the additional bias of an end
result, people across every field are able to gain a logical and
complete understanding of what truly went through the minds of the
decision-makers at the time. De-biasing techniques, such as arguing
against the reported outcome and making a decision journal, ensure that
hindsight bias does not limit one's focus and accurate interpretations
can still be made. 

## Conclusions

Hindsight bias is a complicated phenomenon that preys on people’s
overconfident judgements of a past event. The psychological motivators
of this bias have yet to be fully understood, however, some argue that
it stems from the brain failing to uphold previous resolutions once
updated with new information; others firmly believe that ToM (theory of
mind) plays a major role. No matter what might be causing it, it is
clear that hindsight bias has multiple dangers, the biggest one being
that it will often prohibit decision makers from seeing the possibility
of another path. As a result, hindsight bias often prohibits people from
learning anything from their previous experiences and forcing them to
make faulty judgments in the future. Thankfully, there are ways to
prevent hindsight bias and ensure that your feelings about a decision
are not based off of the real-life outcome; these include reminding
one's self why they made a particular choice in the first place, which can
be done by creating a decision journal. All in all, hindsight bias can
affect people of all ages and life stages, and when given the
opportunity will thoroughly skew one’s memory. This bias holds great
power, but stands no match for someone who is well aware of its effects
and possesses the proper tools to fight it.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

## References

Ackerman, R., Bernstein, D. M., & Kumar, R. (2020). “Metacognitive
hindsight bias.” *Memory & Cognition*, *48*(5), 731. [<span
class="s2">https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-020-01012-w</span>](https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-020-01012-w)<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Ash, I. (2017).“Can Exposure to Post-Outcome Information ‘Debias’ the
Hindsight Bias?” *Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society*, [<span
class="s2">https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jr8164k</span>](https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jr8164k)

Bernstein, D. M., Atance, C., Meltzoff, A. N.,
Loftus, G.R., (2007). “Hindsight bias and developing theories of mind.”
*Child development* vol. 78,4 (2007): 1374-94.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>
<span
class="s4"><https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3649066/></span><span
class="s5"><span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span></span>

Burke, A. S. (2005). Improving Prosecutorial Decision Making: Some
Lessons of Cognitive Science. *William and Mary Law Review*, *47*(5),
1587–1634.

DeBono, K. G. (2019). Cognitive dissonance. *Salem Press Encyclopedia of
Health*.

Fischhoff, B. (1975). “Hindsight Is Not Equal to Foresight: The Effect
of Outcome Knowledge on Judgment under Uncertainty.” *Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance*, vol. 1, no.
3, Aug. 1975, pp. 288–299.
<span
class="s4"><https://psycnet-apa-org.stanford.idm.oclc.org/fulltext/1976-00159-001.pdf></span><span
class="s5"><span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span></span>

Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., & Kahneman, D. (Eds.). (2002). *Heuristics
and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511808098<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Freeman, M. P. (2010). *Hindsight: the promise and peril of looking
backward*. Oxford University Press.

Sanna, L. J., & Schwarz, N. (2003). Debiasing the hindsight bias: The
role of accessibility experiences and (mis)attributions. *Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology (Print)*, *39*(3), 287–295.

Van Boekel, M., Varma, K., & Varma, S. (2017). A retrieval-based
approach to eliminating hindsight bias. *Memory*, *25*(3), 377–390.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2016.1176202

  

  
