# Illusory correlations

Alena DeVaughn & Jason Ah Chuen
 
Imagine you are at a children’s birthday party, and everyone is having a
good time. There are decorations, toys, and sweets everywhere. After the
children eat their cake, open their goodie bags, and enjoy their spoils
from the piñata, the gaggle of children seem to have a second wind of
energy and are running and playing so quickly and loudly that they seem
to be bouncing off of the walls. What is your first impression on the
cause of their behavior? In this instance, many parents attending the
party would remark, “All this sugar sure is making them hyper,” or
something along those lines. Enough Americans hold this conception that candy and sugar is
correlated to high-energy boosts in children that for most it feels like
common knowledge. However, contrary to this extremely popular belief,
multiple studies spanning years of research all conclude that there is
no scientific evidence that the two are related (Wolraich et al., 1995).
So how do people come to that conclusion that children + candy =
hyperactivity?

An *illusory correlation* is the
mistaken belief that two unconnected variables have a strong
relationship (Chapman, 1967). This can happen for a variety of reasons,
but generally occurs when a person sees an association between two
events but falsely infers that there is a correlation there which
doesn’t actually exist in reality. As a result, they then make incorrect
judgments concerning the existence of that correlation. This error in
observation may be because an individual is paying too much attention to
irrelevant information, like events that statistically only happen quite
infrequently, or it may be due to a person’s preconceived notions about
the information they are being presented with. People build up illusory
correlations over time because of observations they’ve made across many
situations, but it’s also possible to create an illusory correlation in
an instant, when a person sees something strange and immediately makes
assumptions about what they’ve seen from then on. Either way there is a
tendency for people to create predictions like these and then use those
beliefs to make judgments in the future, meaning that 
our illusory correlations affect the way we view the world and the way
we behave as a result.

## Initial Research

Chapman originated this term and the research on its topic in 1967. He
hypothesized that stimuli that are either distinctive or associated with
each other in the person’s mind lead a person to perceive correlations
between events that are not correlated at all.

To test this, Chapman showed students word-pairs that had varying levels
of association with each other, i.e. *door-head*, *door-knife*, and
*fork-knife*. 36 word-pairs in total were repeatedly shown to each
participant, in 3 successive testings and split in 3 different groups of
words. 6 of the pairs had strong semantic associations with each other
(such as *fork-knife*). Importantly, each pair was shown equally
often.

Participants were then instructed to report in a questionnaire; they
were shown one of the primary words (*door*, in the above example) and
all its possible coinciding words (*head*, *knife*, and *magazine*), and
asked what percentage of the occurrences of the left word was shown with
the right word. In support
of his hypothesis, students reported the co-occurrences were higher for
word-pairs that have stronger semantic associations between their
meanings. In other words, though each word-pair was repeated the same
amount of times, students reported that pairs like “*fork-knife*” or
“*lion-tiger*” occurred together more often than pairs like
“*hat-tiger*” and “*boat-egg*”. This opened the door to show how
associations can lead us to erroneously overestimate an occurrence’s
importance and frequency. Chapman proposed after his study that the
results reflect real-life situations.

## Distinctiveness-based Correlations

Chapman’s
initial research on this topic also showed how distinctiveness is also
effective at creating an illusory correlation (1967). In the same study,
students reported, similarly to associated word-pairs, that distinctive
word-pairs occurred more often than non-distinct and non-associated
pairs. Chapman did this by including exceedingly long words as a marker
for “distinctiveness”. Of the 30 non-associative word-pairs, 3 of the
pairs were arbitrarily and unusually long. These, similar in length to
“*envelope-sidewalk*,” were included at the same frequency as all other
pairs. However, once again participants reported that these occurred a
higher percentage of the time-- showing that participants believed the
distinct stimuli occurred more frequently. The results from this portion
of the study were also concluded to be representative of a person’s
experience in a real-life scenario.

Distinctiveness-based correlations happen when a person focuses too
closely on strange or noticeable information and overestimates how
significant it is in the explanation of a relationship. Subconsciously
honing in on a variable that stands out creates a bias so that it
appears as though we are more likely to unwittingly determine that
unique and unusual information is explanatory of a connection between
two events (Hamilton & Gifford, 1976). When a person sees something
weird, different, or distinct, we naturally and often subtly pay extra
close attention to it, making us prone to using these more “easily
available” observations when trying to explain other incoming stimuli.
This explains why Chapman’s 1967 study found that people were more
likely to assume that the distinctive long word-pairs were more common
than the typical short word-pairs.

In an explanation of *how* this can
occur, Hamilton and Gifford posited that a person is more likely to
mentally associate two variables with each other because that extra
attention on the unique event actually leads to greater encoding (1976).
They attempted to delve deeper in order to test their hypothesis that
these judgments can be created “on the basis of purely cognitive,
information-processing mechanisms”(p 392). In order to achieve this without
including the role of previous associations, the researchers had to
create novel stimuli that the participants had never encountered before,
so they invented two groups of people: Group A and Group B. By creating
new groups instead of testing participants on existing groups that are
differentiated by race or gender or class etc., the researchers could be
sure that the results wouldn’t be skewed due to the participants'
pre-conceived beliefs and associations connected to each group. Group A
and Group B were assigned actions that were coded as “desirable” or
“undesirable”. Hamilton and Gifford showed each group multiple times to
the participants, and every time each group was assigned four
descriptive actions. Group A was shown more often than Group B, and
desirable actions were shown more often than undesirable ones.
Researchers therefore measure both Group B and undesirable behaviors as
“distinctive”. At the end of the study, participants had to report how
many of the statements reflected the behavior of each group, and how
many of the statements were undesirable. Hamilton and
Gifford’s hypothesis predicted that participants would overestimate how often the two
distinctive events occurred together. This happened - participants reported that the
undesirable actions were attributed to Group B, the smaller group, much
more often than they actually had. Their bias in estimating the
occurrence of undesirable vs desirable behaviors as it relates to
occurrence of each group led them to perceive each group differently.
This has important implications for the formation of stereotyping in real
world scenarios, as we will touch on later.

## Expectancy-based Correlations

Expectancy-based correlations happen when people have
pre-existing expectations of relationships. Hamilton and Rose were among
the first to study the phenomenon in an experiment in 1980, wherein
participants read trait-descriptive sentences about different groups of
people and the traits were either aligned with (that is, stereotypical)
or just neutral with the expectancies for people in each group. Two
stimulus sets of people were created, one using male names and
traditionally male occupations, and the other using female names and
traditionally female occupations. For male stimuli the stereotypical
traits chosen were “accountants (perfectionist, timid), doctors
(thoughtful, wealthy), and salesmen (enthusiastic, talkative)” and the
chosen neutral traits were “courteous” and “boring”. For female people,
the stereotypical traits chosen were “librarians (productive, serious),
stewardesses (attractive, comforting), and waitresses (busy, loud)”,
while their neutral traits were “clever” and “demanding”. The neutral
and stereotypical traits were paired the same number of times for each
group. The dependent variable being measured for this experiment was the
frequency at which the subjects estimated that each trait adjective was
used to describe members of each occupational group. The participants
used in the study were a group of 20 males and 16 females. The results
showed that the participants overestimated the frequency of
stereotype-congruent traits that were used to describe the groups,
although there were no correlations between the traits and occupations
in the stimulus sets created. This means that the participants perceived
relationships that would be expected on the basis of their stereotypic
expectancies. A similar second experiment was conducted but in which
neutral traits were paired more frequently with the group as compared to
the stereotypical traits. The results for this second experiment showed
that the stereotypical traits were still more frequently associated with
their groups, which would mean that relationships mentioned are
perceived as stronger if they confirm a stereotype even though they
might actually appear as often in the evidence.

One way of interpreting the results is through the availability
heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). The latter is a “judgmental
heuristic in which a person evaluates the frequency of classes or the
probability of events by availability, i.e., by the ease with which
relevant instances come to mind.” This can lead to systematic biases and
illusory correlations. In fact, their paper also talks about illusory
correlations and shows that traits that are associated with each other
are more easily retrieved from memory and thus their frequencies are
overestimated, just like in the two experiments mentioned above.

Another way that Hamilton and Rose explained their findings above is
through the schema theory (Rumelhart & Ortony, 1977). A
schema describes a pattern of thought or behavior that organizes
categories of information and the relationships among them. The schema
theory itself is that information in our brain is organized into those
schemas, and the latter are thus used to select and organize any new
information and integrate it into our existing knowledge. Information
can also be retrieved from those schemas whenever we need it. The way it
explains illusory expectancy-based correlations is that information is
more easily stored and retrieved if it belongs to an existing schema.
Hence, when traits are stereotypical or expected for a particular group,
they are both encoded and retrieved more effectively from memory.

## Reconciling expectancy-based and distinctiveness-based effects

The expectancy-based correlations and distinctive-based correlation
effects seem to contradict each other since the subject’s prior
expectancies lead to different outcomes. For expectancy-based
correlations there is an overestimation of congruent effects, but in
distinctiveness based correlations there is a better recall of
incongruent rather than congruent effects. For example, in the Hamilton
and Rose (1980) study, congruent effects would refer to the examples
where traits are stereotypical or expected of the social groups, and
incongruent effects would refer to examples for which the traits seem to
be incompatible with the associated groups. In 1996, Garcia-Marques and
Hamilton tried to explain this contradiction via the TRAP (Twofold
Retrieval by Associative Pathways) model. In summary, the model proposes
that retrieval processes occur through either free recall and frequency
estimation, which themselves depend on different processes. Free recall
initiates an exhaustive search through memory for the target object.
Since there are a larger number of inter-item associations between
incongruent items formed during the initial encoding phase, this
exhaustive search causes more incongruent behaviors to be recalled. This
means that incongruent information is processed more extensively, which
thus explains distinctiveness-based illusory correlations. Conversely,
frequency estimation takes a more heuristic approach whereby we try to
sample items that have the target attribute. Congruent information has
stronger associations with the target attribute, which speeds up the
process of retrieval through frequency estimation and thus results in
expectancy-based correlations. This theoretical framework model can thus
explain the two seemingly incompatible types of illusory correlations.

## Real-Life Implications

Such correlations can explain stereotype threats in humans on the
negative side, and possibly halo effects which can sometimes be positive
but negative at other times.

Let’s first consider stereotype threat, which is defined as
the socially-premised psychological threat experienced by someone who is
in a situation or doing things for which there exists a negative
stereotype about that person’s social group belonging and they thus
become more likely to conform to that stereotype (Steele & Aronson,
1995). It is one of the most widely studied phenomena in social
psychology, especially as people from marginalized groups usually suffer
from it even today. The original experiment for stereotype threat comes
from that same paper, and it showed that African American subjects
underperformed on a test when it was viewed as an indication of their
intellectual ability but they did similarly to their White peers when it
was not viewed as a indication of intellectual ability. This showed
that the existence of social stereotypes can impede performance in
academic fields, and possibly in many other fields too. How do those
stereotypes happen in the first place?

The “paired distinctiveness” concept 
that came up in the Hamilton research has implications for the creation
of stereotyping. As a reminder, participants viewed undesirable behavior
as infrequent and unusual, and they viewed Group B as infrequent and
unusual, and from there they developed an illusory correlation that the
two were related. When one transfers the trends shown in the research
onto real-life situations and groups of people, it seems possible that
if people view a “Group B” as distinctive, and “undesirable behaviors”
as distinctive, that they will then be likely to cognitively generalize
and begin to associate those traits with an entire group of people.
Though these types of decisions about the connection between stimuli,
(such as racial groups and personality/behavioral traits), are
unconsciously made and unintentionally reinforced, they end up becoming
strongly held, conscious beliefs that have real effects on how we
purport stereotypes onto outside groups of people and behave accordingly
and intentionally.

Stereotyping can also be explained through expectancy-based
correlations. Like presented in the findings of Hamilton and Rose
(1980), stereotypes consist of a large number of expectancies in regard
to a social group and we are more likely to recall information or traits
that are in line with those expectations in contrast to
expectancy-irrelevant information. Hence, this biases the processing of
information as we interact with different social groups. For example, if
one has the prior belief that “girls are bad at math” and they interact
with a girl in a math class setting, they would be more likely to find
and process cues that show that the girl is indeed bad at math, which
will confirm their expectations. Unfortunately, such a mechanism would
cause the perceiver to even further believe in the validity of the
stereotype and reinforce their expectations for the future, which is why
stereotypes usually persist for a long time, if not for all of one’s
lifetime. Alas, that girl who might actually be really good at math but
is aware of those stereotypes, might end up underperforming or feeling
less confident of her own math abilities.

Halo effect, also known as halo error, is a type of cognitive bias
whereby our perception of someone’s ability to be good at something is
positively influenced by the person’s other related traits. The halo
effect might be due to the fact that people extrapolate their general
impression of others to attributes that they actually have no
information about (Nisbett and Wilson, 1977). For example, people tend
to think that attractive people are nicer and less attractive people are
less nice, although there is actually no correlation between the two
attributes. Several papers have made use of illusory correlations as one
of the theories that can be used to explain the halo effect. For
example, Chapmans' 1969 illusory correlations study,
in which illusory correlation was seen as an obstacle for clinicians to
determine the sexual orientations of their clients, is discussed in
the “Ubiquitous Halo” paper (Cooper, 1981) as well as in “Nature and
Consequences of Halo Error: A Critical Analysis” (Murphy, Jako, Anhalt,
1993). The cognitive distortions and errors in judgement in the papers
are also often referred to as “illusory halos” (which are essentially
illusory correlations) as opposed to “true halos” which are actual
correlations, although it has been shown that it is really hard to
distinguish the two.

## How we can (try to) avoid falling for illusory correlations

It is very hard to avoid falling for illusory correlations. If we try to
analyze the relevant data, we might want to try to recall it from our
own experience, but this process and data retrieved would be biased.
Instead, we can try to look at and analyze the data that people have
collected through rigorous methods and perform statistical tests on it
to show whether or not there is any amount of correlation, if any. For
example, a contingency table is usually used in statistics to analyze
relationships between categorical variables. A chi squared test can be
performed on the variables to see whether a relationship does exist
between them. When the variables are continuous, instead the correlation
coefficient between the two variables can be calculated to determine how
strong the relationship is between the two variables.

However, we note that people usually do not have such data that is
needed to compute these statistics for the kinds of judgements involved
in illusory correlations. This brings us back to our original point that
avoiding illusory correlations is very hard!

## Conclusion

Illusory correlations are common occurrences for the average
person. Given the
evolutionary need to make split-second judgments about stimuli in order
to ascertain one’s safety, it makes the most sense for the human brain
to make generalizations in order to speed up the process of deciding
what is trustworthy and what is dangerous. This issue today comes
because of the tendency of our brains to make such generalizations based
on limited and irrelevant information like previous associations and
infrequent events, meaning that this prioritization of speed leaves a
margin of neglect when it comes to accuracy. Even though these mental
connections are being formed unconsciously, they can end up manifesting
as strongly held beliefs that inaccurately portray an outside
individual’s traits, and in a greater sense are generalized onto large
groups of people. Illusory correlations should be a factor that is kept
in mind when trying to determine what kind of mistakes a person may have
made in their appraisal of a situation, and where the beliefs and
assumptions that led to the mistake resulted from. 

## References

Chapman L.J. (1967). Illusory correlation in observational report. *Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior*, 6 (1) , pp. 151-155.

Chapman, L. J., & Chapman, J. P. (1969). Illusory correlation as an
obstacle to the use of valid psychodiagnostic signs. *Journal of
abnormal psychology*, 74(3), 271.

Cooper, W. H. (1981). Ubiquitous halo. *Psychological bulletin*, 90(2),
218.

Garcia-Marques L, Hamilton DL. Resolving the apparent discrepancy
between the incongruency effect and the expectancy-based illusory
correlation effect: the TRAP model. *J Pers Soc Psychol*. 1996
Nov;71(5):845-60. doi: 10.1037//0022-3514.71.5.845. PMID: 8939036.

Hamilton D.L., Gifford R.K. Illusory correlation in interpersonal
perception: A cognitive basis of stereotypic judgments (1976) *Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology,* 12 (4) , pp. 392-407.

Hamilton, D. L., & Rose, T. L. (1980). Illusory correlation and the
maintenance of stereotypic beliefs. *Journal of personality and social
psychology*, 39(5), 832.

Murphy, K. R., Jako, R. A., & Anhalt, R. L. (1993). Nature and
consequences of halo error: A critical analysis. *Journal of Applied
psychology*, 78(2), 218.

Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). The halo effect: evidence for
unconscious alteration of judgments. *Journal of personality and social
psychology*, 35(4), 250.

Rumelhart, D.E., & Ortony, A. (1977). The representation of knowledge in
memory. In R.C. Anderson, R.J. Spiro & W.E. Montague (Eds.), Schooling
and the acquisition of knowledge (pp. 99-135). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum

Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the
intellectual test performance of African Americans. *Journal of
personality and social psychology,* 69(5), 797.

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for
judging frequency and probability. *Cognitive psychology*, 5(2),
207-232.

Wolraich, M. L., Wilson, D. B., &amp; White, J. W. (1995). The Effect of
Sugar on Behavior or Cognition in Children. *JAMA*, 274(20), 1617.

  

  
