# Mental accounting

Shelly Deng & Brandon McGorty

In behavioral economics, mental accounting refers to the set of
rules describing how individuals value and spend money based on the
money’s origin and on how one labels the money. For example, people
may treat money intended for one category of purchases differently
than money intended for another category. In evaluating and making
financial decisions using mental accounting, people evaluate between
options within a specific context and in relation to a reference
point. With context in mind and using a reference point, people
place money into different mental buckets. Specifically, individuals
set up decision frames for money in different buckets, and for each,
they evaluate different outcomes as they are relevant to the
reference or neutral outcome. Since people put a mental label to
money, the principle of fungibility, which states that any unit of
money is substitutable, is violated.
    
Mental accounting examples are prevalent throughout our daily lives.
To give a simple example, suppose that John spends no more than \$30
for a bottle of wine normally, but since he won the lottery of \$45
this month, he decided to make a one-time purchase of a bottle that
costs \$45. This example is consistent with the idea that there
exists different mental accounts for hard-earned money (i.e. from
his salary) and for windfall money (i.e. for the lottery). This
difference in labeling results in him spending money in a manner
that is atypical of his normal spending behavior.
    
With a basic introduction to mental accounting, the rest of this
chapter will dive into mental accounting a little deeper.
Specifically, mental accounting involves three components:
perception and evaluation, budgeting, and choice bracketing. The
first component, perception and evaluation, is concerned with how
individuals perceive outcomes and evaluate decisions. The second
component, budgeting, involves assigning different decisions to
specific mental accounts. Finally, the third component of choice
bracketing is concerned with evaluation of mental accounting and the
frequency in which accounts are balanced. In this chapter, we will
aim to understand these three components of mental accounting. We
will end the chapter summarizing important points and review their
implications, in hope to shed light on how we may use mental
accounting to our advantage and combat irrational financial
pitfalls.

## First Component: Perception and Evaluation
The way
individuals perceive outcomes and evaluate decisions plays an
important role in mental accounting. To understand the perception
and evaluation component of mental accounting, we must understand
how gains and losses are viewed and how individuals perform hedonic
editing to maximize utility. Additionally, we need to understand
transaction theory and how time affects financial decisions.


First, we will use the value function from prospect theory to model
the utility. The value function has three key features: gains and
losses are thought of in relation to a reference point (usually the
status quo), the value function is piecewise where the gain function
is concave and the loss function is convex, and the value function
adheres to loss aversion principles.

Given a set of outcomes within the same mental account, individuals
tend to perform hedonic framing to maximize utility (or pleasure)
although there are exceptions to the hedonic framing hypothesis\*.
Generally, there are four principles of hedonic framing. First,
individuals tend to segregate gains, which makes sense since the
gain function is concave. Indeed, 64% of the research participants
believe that someone who won two lottery tickets with the total
value of \$75 is happier than someone who won a single lottery worth
\$75 (Thaler, 1985, 1999). Second, individuals integrate losses.
Because the loss function is convex, losing \$30 and then losing \$20
is less preferred than losing \$50 at once. In fact, credit cards may
help reduce the mental cost of spending by directly integrating
spending/losses (Thaler, 1985). Third, people tend to integrate
smaller losses with larger gains. By combining smaller losses with
larger gains, individuals can view the two outcomes as a single
smaller gain, and this allows them to reduce the psychological
penalty of loss aversion. Finally, people tend to segregate small
gains from larger losses. For example, the majority of research
subjects believe that Person A who has to pay \$175 to repair a car
is less happy than Person B who has to pay \$200 to repair a car but
who won \$25 from an office football pool (Thaler, 1985).
Intuitively, this makes sense because such segregation allows Person
B to see the small winning as a silver lining. From the value
function, this also makes sense since the gain function is the
steepest at the origin. Combining small gains with larger losses
would reduce the magnitude of displeasure. However, this reduction
is less than the gain of utility from segregation of the smaller
gain from the larger loss.

Utility affects how individuals evaluate financial decisions. When
making a purchase, consumers get acquisition utility as well as
transaction utility. Acquisition utility is the measure of the value
of the good relative to the price, and transaction utility is the
measure of the value of the good as determined by the perceived
value of the “deal” (Thaler, 1999). Thus, individuals may make
irrational purchases simply because they are good deals. For
example, many people end up buying items that they barely use. On
the flip side, individuals also may give up buying an item even if
it makes them better off because it has negative transaction
utility. To illustrate, consumers typically have different reference
price points for goods at different contexts. For example, consumers
are typically willing to pay around \$1 at a convenience store but
\$3.50 at Disney World for a standard-sized water bottle. With these
reference price points in mind, they may not purchase the water for
\$2.50 at a convenience store even if they are really thirsty.

Finally, the concept of time plays a role in how people make and
evaluate financial decisions. First, advance purchases are
considered investments, which allows consumers to decouple payment
and consumption. Since payment is made at an earlier time, consumers
do not have to bear the psychological pain of paying, thus allowing
them to enjoy their goods as if they are free. Examples of advance
purchases include buying a case of wine, paying for time-share
properties, and the use of credit cards.

Sunk cost, which pertains to financial decisions previously made,
connects to advance purchases. To give an example, people exhibit
the sunk cost effect when they sit through a movie that they
dislike, simply because of the money that they paid to see it. Sunk
cost has implications for mental accounting. Specifically in a
research study by<span class="Apple-converted-space"> 
</span>Kahneman and Tversky, subjects are less likely to buy a
second ticket to a play after they lost their ticket than to
purchase the ticket for the first time but after losing the same
amount of money (1984). In either case, the consumer’s overall
wealth will decrease by the same amount in both scenarios if they
decide to watch the play. However, because consumers have different
buckets and budgets for different outcomes, the sunk cost effect is
activated, and they become more inclined to purchase a ticket in one
scenario than the other. 

## Second Component: Budgeting
Mental accounting influences how people budget. Budgeting happens in
three ways or levels. First, expenditures are grouped into budgets.
For example, it is common to have separate budgets for food,
housing, entertainment, and more. Second, wealth is allocated into
different mental wealth accounts, and some common ones include
checking, saving, and rainy-day. Finally, income is divided based on
source. For example, it can be regular income (i.e. salary) or
windfall (i.e. winning the lottery). These labeling of money can
thus reduce flexibility in how money is spent.

The grouping of expenditure into budgets involves two steps: booking
and posting. First, the consumer must be aware of or register the
expense. Second, the consumer must then classify that expense into
the proper account. However, this booking and posting process
inherently has a blindspotted pitfall: small expenditures tend to
fall into the cracks and go unnoticed. For example, paying \$0.50 in
tip for a coffee may look innocent, but repeated enough, this can
sum to a large amount. Businesses thus often may take advantage of
such phenomenon to trick consumers into spending money, and examples
in real life include the purchasing of iCloud storage or subscribing
to Spotify. While individuals may budget expenditures to reduce
spending (i.e. setting a maximum on a certain type of goods), being
mindful of small expenses to ensure booking and posting of all
expenses is necessary for effective execution of reducing
spending.

Wealth is often automatically placed into different accounts. People
have different spending habits for different wealth accounts, and
certain allocation of wealth allows individuals to enforce
self-control in their expenditure. For example, people typically
have little reservation spending current assets such as cash and
checking accounts. Then they have increasing reservation about
touching the funds in the current wealth bucket (saving accounts,
stocks, bonds, mutual fund), home equity bucket, and future income
bucket. 

Mental accounting has implications for intertemporal choices. For
example, suppose there are two scenarios: In the first, consumers
have the choice of receiving \$10 today or \$15 in a year. In the second, they have the
choice of receiving \$100 or \$150 with the same timeline.
Participants tend to choose differently for the two scenarios, and
researchers have tried to explain this using mental accounting
(Shefrin & Thaler, 1988; Loewenstein & Thaler, 1989). The
participant might put that gain into the mental “saving” account
when the amount is large but in the mental “checking” account when
the amount is small. Effectively, this means that they would be
foregoing consumption when the amount is small but foregoing
interest when the amount is large. In that case, the consumer may
wish to receive \$8 now in order to have the money for spending but
choose the \$100 option because \$20 is more than the interest that
one can earn from \$80 in two weeks.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Additionally, classifying money into different mental wealth
accounts (i.e. saving, checking) may enable people to save more.
Since people are less likely to spend from the “home equity” or
“future income” buckets, placing money in these buckets may help
them save. Specifically, this might mean buying houses as investment
and signing on job offers that give increasing salaries rather than
a flat rate over some number of years.

Finally, income is labeled based on its source, and people may have
different spending rules for money from different sources.
Typically, people match their spending criterion with how easy they
obtain the income. For example, people might be less inclined to
spend on a luxurious vacation using their salary money, but they are
more likely to do so if the money came from a lottery win. This
labeling of money shows that people do not have strict rules that
govern how they spend money.

## Third Component: Individual vs. grouped decisions

When analyzing financial decisions made by individuals it’s
important to know whether they made decisions one at a time or
grouped together in predicting their consumer outcomes. According to
the theory of fungibility, money should have the same value no
matter what it’s being used for. We see in many ways this becomes
false when we look at mental accounting. People often put their
costs into different groupings or categories which violates this
principle because it puts a different value on money depending on
what it’s being spent for. For example, an individual may have
different expenses laid out for housing, food, or clothes and are
willing to put different budgets on each when in reality the money
all has the same value. When these different groupings are made,
there are different reference points for spending which leads to
people spending more even though they feel well organized.

When individuals establish groupings to their spending, such as
money allocated for housing or electric bills, they begin to spend
in a group specific way. Depending on the framing of each group,
people are willing to spend more on things when it fits into a
category with a higher budget.

The value of gains and losses and how we frame decisions moving
forward is very important in our financial decisions. When analyzing
the framing of gains and losses it is very important to consider the
value function. This shows how events are perceived and coded in
decision making. We see that the value function is defined by a
certain reference point when analyzing gains and losses. For
example, when individuals have larger losses paired with small gains
they often feel better about the situation, which is referred to as
hedonic framing (Thaler, 1999). An example of this would be with
investing. Say an investor lost \$5,000 but also made \$1,000 they
would feel better than just losing \$4,000. Even though they have
lost the same amount of money they feel better about the first
situation because they are framed to appreciate gains. Likewise,
people often cancel out losses when they can pair them with large
gains.

The article “Individual Differences in Mental Accounting'' by
Stephan Muehlbacher and Erich Kirchler presents three studies that
apply a Likert-type scale to assess how much individuals engage in
mental accounting practices. Their work showed that when individuals
use categories for how they spend, a loss in a certain category,
like housing for example, will lead to less spending in that
category in the future when we compare this to spending without
categories. Also, when an individual has two separate gains, they
often look at the value as greater than the actual combined value
is. Likewise, when people have already been losing a lot, a little
more loss tends to not seem as serious as that same value of a loss
without prior losing.

An important concept related to this topic is myopic loss aversion.
To understand myopic loss aversion, we must first understand loss
aversion as a whole. Loss aversion refers to the tendency to prefer
to avoid potential losses versus obtaining gains. In other words, a
person would avoid risking \$70 in order to potentially win \$50. This
seems similar to the concept of risk aversion with the main
difference being that with loss aversion, the utility of a monetary
payoff is determined by previous experiences. Myopic loss aversion
refers to the theory that the more frequently we evaluate our
portfolio, the more likely we are to observe a loss and subject
ourselves to loss aversion (Thaler, 1999). This means that when
individuals analyze their money and put labels on what it’s spent
on, they become more likely to spend less in categories where there
is risk of losing money based on past experiences.

When you take these individuals, who are loss-averse, we see that
they are more willing to take risks if many bets are paired together
versus if they consider each on their own. This relates well to the
theories previously discussed because we know that individuals tend
to view losses as less aversive if they’re paired with gains and
also tend to feel less bad about a small particular loss when
they’ve already been losing. Gneezy and Potters showed in a 1997
study that individuals are more risk seeking when they are shown
30-year return rates when investing versus when they’re shown 1-year
return rates. This is because individuals see the gains clumped into
one final gain and the losses along the way don’t seem as
significant versus losses in the short run are more severe if they
aren’t paired with big gains.

The implications of these mental accounting principles are
important. How we value and spend our money is vital to our
long-term financial well-being. It’s important to understand the
ways people tend to value money and how we can better act to fully
maximize our finances. By furthering their knowledge on money
spending practices, people can be better prepared to be financially
intelligent with their money and maximize its potential.

## References

Muehlbacher, S., & Kirchler, E. (2019, December 3). *Individual
Differences in Mental Accounting*. Frontiers.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02866/full.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Thaler, R. (1985). *Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice*.
Marketing Science. https://www.jstor.org/stable/183904?seq=1.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Thaler, R. H. (1999). *Mental Accounting Matters*. Journal of
Behavioral Decisions Making.
https://people.bath.ac.uk/mnsrf/Teaching%202011/Thaler-99.pdf.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Thaler, R. H. (2017, October 9). *Integrating Economics With
Psychology* . Kungl. Vetenskaps Akademien.
https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/advanced-economicsciences2017.pdf.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. 'Choices, values, and frames'. *The
American Psychologist*, 39 (1984), 341-350. Keren, G. 'Additional
tests of utility theory under unique and repeated conditions'.
*Journal of Behavioral Decision Making*, 4 (1991), 297-304.

Thaler R. H. “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice”, *Marketing
Science,* **4** (1985), 199-214.  

Loewenstein, George, and Richard H. Thaler. 1989. "Anomalies:
Intertemporal Choice." *Journal of Economic Perspectives*, 3 (4):
181-193.

Shefrin, Hersh, and Richard H. Thaler, “The Behavioral Life-Cycle
Hypothesis,” *Economic Inquiry, October* 1988, *26*, 609-643.
