# Option Paralysis: When Less is More

Real Woods & Darnell Carson

**In A Bit of a Jam**
> Imagine this: You walk into your local grocery store on a Saturday
afternoon, ready to shop. As you enter, you are beckoned over a
display table and asked to taste test from a selection of jams.
Depending on the day, the researchers could present you with as few
as six jams or as many as 24! How does the number of options
influence your likeliness to stop at the booth? And how does it
impact the likelihood that you’ll end up buying one of the jams?

This is precisely what researchers Mark Lepper and Sheena Iyengar
set out to discover (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000). With the help of some
research assistants, they set up shop in a Menlo Park grocery store
and asked people to stop at their displays of “exotic” jams, meaning
flavors other than your typical strawberry or grape. They wanted to
know how the number of options would affect the customers’
decision-making.

From this study and two others reported within the same paper,
Lepper and Iyengar found that, in general, people were more
attracted to the possibility of having more choice. People were more
likely to stop at the display of 30 jams than the display of 6 jams.
However, they found that what they called the “initial
attractiveness of selections” did not influence subsequent buying
behavior. They found the opposite: people presented with fewer
choices were more likely to buy one of the jams.

Underlying this experiment was the *choice overload hypothesis*.
This chapter will define choice overload, also known as “option
paralysis,” and provide some examples of how it manifests in our
decision-making.

## Option Paralysis

Option paralysis, or *overchoice*, is a state characterized by
too many choices causing an impaired ability to decide due to
internally conflicting desires or a conflicting unknown about the
value that each selection might fulfill. Intuitively, we assume more
choices are better because they allow us to analyze the differential
value between each alternative and gear your decision toward the
choice that best fulfills your desires. But, how many choices are
too many? What happens when, in analyzing your options, you find
that multiple choices might bring the same fulfillment, might
fulfill different desires equally, or you simply can not entirely
grasp what you desire. Option paralysis can lead to other psychological outcomes,
such as *analysis paralysis* (see below) and *buyer’s remorse* (see
below).

Not all encounters with multiple choices result in an inability to
decide. Certain preconditions are required before a state of option
paralysis is experienced. The absence of prior bias is necessary
because, despite the number of choices one may have, a decision can
be made without any conflicting desires when there is a clear
initial bias towards a particular choice (Scheibehenne et al., 2010).
Quality equivalence is
also necessary for option paralysis to occur (Scheibehenne et al., 2010).
 If one analyzes their
choices and finds that one option is clearly better than the rest,
they won’t reach a state of option paralysis. Lastly, unfamiliarity
is sometimes necessary for option paralysis to occur (Iyengar &
Lepper, 2000). If an individual has experienced the same or similar
set of choices before, they have likely learned which option is best
suited for them. This was behind the reasoning of removing defaults
from the jam study. The researchers didn’t want people to base their
choices on flavors with which they were likely familiar. This is not
to say that option paralysis is impossible if you have previously
experienced the same set of choices. The individual may have
different preferences the next time around, or they may have never
decided.

We see the effects of overchoice most often as consumers in a
capitalist economic system. If you’ve ever walked into a grocery
store, you know that there are countless products on shelves that
serve more-or-less similar functions. If you shop online, the
variety grows to an almost limitless extent. The amount of choice
here can seem appealing at first but can also make decisions much
harder. We can only process so many items simultaneously, and our
options can be under even more pressure if there are other
constraints like a time crunch.

To make a purchase, they must first select an assortment of
products, and then they must choose from that assortment. Variety
and complexity impact the consumer’s final decision on which product
to buy, if at all (Townsend & Khan, 2014). Variety is the positive
aspect of this process because consumers want more options when
trying to decide. Complexity, however, is the negative aspect of
this process because too much variety increases the complexity of
decision-making. When there is too much complexity, consumers may
put off or opt-out of the decision.

## Examples

### Analysis Paralysis

Analysis paralysis is a state that is very closely
linked to overchoice. It describes the act of overthinking or
overanalyzing a situation so much that you become unable to make a
decision. The person thinking about the decision may be so worried
about whether their decision is the best decision that they never
come to one in the first place (Kurien et al., 2014).

We see this because so few
people decided to take the jams in the study we’ve been discussing.
They were presented with many more jams at the display than people
in the limited-choice condition but sampled about the same number of
jams, just under two jams. Already, the table, they are faced with
the issue of choosing which jams to sample. In the jam aisle, they
are faced with this decision again, but potentially also with a
sense of doubt concerning whether they tried the right flavors. In
the end, very few can come to a final decision to buy a jam, unsure
that their choice will be the correct one.

### Buyer’s Remorse

Buyer’s remorse refers to
the sense of regret a consumer makes after a purchase. This regret
is not limited to purchases of choosing between many options;
buyer’s remorse can also come from purchasing expensive items.
Buyer’s remorse stems from the cognitive dissonance that comes from
having to make difficult decisions (Sweeney et al., 2000). Many
factors affect buyer’s remorse, but let’s focus on the role
overchoice plays.

Let’s revisit our jam
experiment from the beginning of the chapter. You walk into your
local grocery store and are invited to a display of jams, either 6
or 24 in number. Afterward, you have the opportunity to go and buy
the jams. Given your display exposure, how likely are you to buy the
jam, and how satisfied are you with your purchase afterward?

According to the 2000 Iyengar &
Lepper study, 30% of the people who visited the 6-jam display bought
a jam, significantly higher than the 3% of people who saw the 24-jam
display that purchased a jam. It could be that the people presented
with so many options had a hard time deciding the first place, which
we’ll look at in the next section.

The people in the
limited-choice condition were more likely to buy the jam and were
more likely to be satisfied with their choice. In a similar study
with chocolates, researchers found that people presented with more
extensive choices were much more dissatisfied with their decisions
than those in limited choice conditions.

Here, overchoice has led to the
manifestation of buyer’s remorse. People in the limited choice
condition are most likely more sure of the choice they’ve made from
already limited options, and therefore more secure and satisfied
with their decision. However, people in the extensive choice
condition might spend time wondering if the choice they made was the
right one, given the number of similarly appealing options.

## Combatting Option Paralysis

### Choice Architecture

Choice architecture is concerned with the ways
choices are presented to consumers and how those presentations end
up impacting the decision-making process. Option paralysis is just
one of the outcomes of choice architecture, and understanding how it
operates can help us better understand how to nudge consumers
towards specific outcomes. The number of choices is just one factor
that can impact decision-making. Other things that impact this
process include descriptions of the options or the presence of
“defaults.”

The researchers made sure to remove flavors we may consider to be
“defaults,” like grape and strawberry in the jam study. They were
worried that these flavors would affect the study’s findings because
people would just default to jam options they are used to instead of
trying more “exotic” flavors. By removing these options, they
removed the ability of people to default to what they already knew,
and we got a better sense of how decision-making works for similarly
appealing unknowns.

Manipulating the choice architecture in experiments allows
experimenters to measure what differences these changes make in
consumer outcomes, which helps them understand how to best present
the choices in a real-world setting.

## Summary

Overchoice and option paralysis explain to us the reasoning behind
the adage, “less is more.” According to a 1965 study, a consumer can
only process 7 items at a time (Miller, 1965). When we are presented
with too wide a variety of options, our brains need strategies to
aid in the decision-making process. In the real world, this results
in people either putting off a purchase or deciding not to purchase
altogether.

In addition to option paralysis, people can also experience
conditions such as buyer’s remorse and analysis paralysis due to
decision-making. Studying choice architecture and how people respond
to changes in the ways choices are presented can help us better
understand how to achieve the results for which we are aiming. The
tough decisions that these situations present can be alleviated with
the help of heuristics and past knowledge. In the next chapter, you
learn about sunk cost and how that also factors into the
decision-making process.

## References

Iyengar, Sheena S.; Lepper, Mark R. (2000). "When choice is
demotivating: Can one desire too much of a good thing?" (PDF).
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 79 (6): 995–1006.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.6.995. PMID 11138768. Archived from the
original (PDF) on 2013-11-30.

Kurien, R., Paila, A. R., & Nagendra, A. (2014). Application of
Paralysis Analysis Syndrome in Customer Decision Making. Procedia
Economics and Finance, 11, 323–334. [<span
class="s5">https://doi.org/10.1016/s2212-5671(14)00200-7</span>](https://doi.org/10.1016/s2212-5671(14)00200-7)

Miller, George A.
(1956). "The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on
our capacity for processing information". Psychological Review. 63
(2): 81–97. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.308.8071. doi:10.1037/h0043158. PMID
13310704.

Scheibehenne, B., Todd, P. M., & Greifeneder, R. (2010). Can there
ever be too many options? A meta‐analytic review of choice overload.
Journal of Consumer Research, 37(3), 409-425. doi:10.1086/651235

Sweeney, Jillian; Douglas Hausknecht; Geoffrey Soutar (May 2000).
"Cognitive Dissonance after Purchase: A Multidimensional Scale".
Psychology & Marketing. 17 (5): 369–385.
doi:10.1002/(sici)1520-6793(200005)17:5&lt;369::aid-mar1&gt;3.0.co;2-g

Townsend, Claudia; Kahn, Barbara E. (2014). "The "Visual Preference
Heuristic": The Influence of Visual versus Verbal Depiction on
Assortment Processing, Perceived Variety, and Choice Overload".
Journal of Consumer Research. 40 (5): 993–1015. doi:10.1086/673521.
S2CID 6758197.
