# Political Decision Making

Jaden Abas & Anshul Gupta

In Abraham Lincoln’s famous Gettysburg Address, the 16th President
underscored the importance of a government “of the people, by the
people, for the people”, a phrase now used religiously by politicians
and civic teachers alike. But how do the people select a government that
represents them? How do the representatives make decisions ‘for the
people’? We know that voting is not as simple as whichever candidate
sounds the most polished and that decision making is not as simple as
determining which side of an issue the majority of voters support.
Furthermore, decisions on who leads the country and how they do so have
dramatic consequences on all of society. Government plays a massive role
in every aspect of our lives, from taxes to welfare to regulation to
healthcare. Because of this monumental impact, there are a variety of
influences on decision-making, including individual morals, party
affiliation, special interests, bureaucratic concerns, and economic
constraints. As a result, we believe a chapter on political
decision-making in this larger book on judgement and decision making is
crucial. We will first analyze how an individual, as part of the mass
public, makes decisions on voting and then will focus on how political
elites, empowered by the social contract with the citizenry, navigate
through the complexities of governing. What research shows is that these
individuals largely rely on heuristics, which have concrete effects on
optimality of outcomes.

## Voter decisions

While some of the most engaged citizens directly campaign or volunteer
for various organizations, the most important and direct participation
an average person has is in choosing his or her preferred candidate at a
local, regional, or national level. There are many theories on how
individuals make this incredibly important decision. From a
philosophical level, Mansbridge et al. find that in addition to being
self-interested, we ought to also think through principles such as
equality and reciprocity which require critical thinking and the
‘negotiation of conflicting interests’ as individuals and as a society.
The reality however is that political knowledge as well as the time to
be well-read and sophisticated on a litany of issues and decide which
candidates and parties best carry out these interests is quite limited.
In fact, a variety of research suggests that voters’ beliefs suggest a
lack of the critical thinking that Mansbridge discusses. For example,
Bartels discusses an instance after a tax cut passed under George W.
Bush in which a majority of voters surveyed had supported the tax cuts
but also disapproved of measures that increased wealth inequality.
However, the tax cut was regressive in nature with provisions such as a
repeal of an estate tax, which primarily affected the wealthy rather
than the poor. Being able to make nuanced distinctions and develop
sophisticated positions on which candidate to support is even more
difficult in an era of ‘fake news’ and misinformation that has exploded
in conjunction with social media. Problematically, Nyhan and Reifler
find evidence that misperceptions about candidates or topics (which can
be perpetuated by ‘fake news’) tend to persist and that corrections
after the fact do not substantially influence people’s beliefs. So how
do voters decide what they believe and who to support then? Samuel
Popkin of UCSD attributes these notions to ‘low information
rationality’, which refers to the use of shortcuts and heuristics to
make choices amongst candidates. These tend to be gained via daily
interactions, media, and social networks.

What are some core heuristics that voters use? The most obvious one is
partisanship, as shown by Angus Campbell et al. in 1960, which refers to
the notion that a candidate’s party affiliation generally provides the
voter enough information about the candidate’s beliefs and values. That
is very similar to the heuristic of ideology, which refers to the
ability of terms such as ‘conservative’ and ‘liberal’ as a proxy for
understanding a candidate's views on a variety of positions, such as
limited government and equality respectively. Historically, class/race
and religion have even played a significant role as well (Campbell et
al. 2011). But what is the effect of using these heuristics? Lavine,
Johnston, and Steenbergen find that blind partisan loyalty can actually
cause voters to believe their party’s actions are closely aligned to
their own beliefs, even though they may not be. This is problematic
because then true accountability becomes more difficult if politicians
have ‘blind’ followings. However, in all, heuristics exist for a reason.
Even though they may create biases, there is no definitive research
suggesting that a more holistic, critical approach yields ‘better’
outcomes, especially if this causes additional confusion (Gigerenzer &
Pachuk, 2011).

## Political elite decisions

The judgments and decisions made by the political elite have a
major effect on the natural world and the overall well-being of our
society. The elite are a select group of individuals who hold a
disproportionate amount of power over government legislation and foreign
affairs. The elite are trained politicians that are seen as best
equipped to optimize the community making the most efficient decision.
They must be able to accurately interpret what policies the population
needs/wants and predict how the mass public will view the policy after
it is implemented. Their sole goal is to optimize expected utility,
bettering the community they are designated to manage. Regarding
implementing policies, the mass public lack the necessary expertise to
figure out the most effective decision. The elite generally carry the
imperative knowledge to make the best judgement when dealing with such
complex decisions having an effect on such a vast amount of people.
Politics is not a simple topic and deciphering what systems should be in
place to maximize society should only be a task for the most
informed.

According to Ivan Cerovac’s paper titled “Elite Decision Making,” the
elite are less prone to loss aversion and are better at utilizing
heuristics in an effective manner when given complex topics (Cerovac,
2016). Heuristics are cognitive techniques that allow the individual to
reach a quick and efficient judgement during decision-making. Heuristics
are necessary for decision making, especially among the political elite,
because it allows one to take an excess of information to derive the
appropriate decision. Not
only do the political elite have to come up with decisions regarding
complex situations, they also must consider a surplus of information
that would take a substantial amount of time to consider all options in
the decision.

Some may think that the political elite don’t follow the principles of
heuristics as much as the ordinary citizen due to their expertise in the
subject, however the elite often use heuristics when dealing with
prominent decisions. The heuristics that are often seen among the elite
in political decision-making are availability, anchoring and adjustment,
and representativeness.

### Availability
The availability heuristic, like
other heuristics, is a mental shortcut to derive a decision but differs
from other heuristics by relying on immediate ideas that come to the
individual when evaluating their judgment of a situation. Essentially
the examples that we more readily recall are the ones our cognition
views as most important. An example of this that relates to society and
politics today is the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement. Political
elite may predict the necessary steps to address the social movement
however fail to execute the appropriate policy. If a far-left politician
was told to address the BLM movement, they might instantly
think of the passing of George Floyd and the multiple instances of
police brutality. However, if a far-right politician was asked about
their thoughts toward the BLM movement their initial thought would
bring up the violent protests and riots members of the movement
committed. The initial thought that they retrieve from memory proves
what values they hold closest to them and how they feel about the topic.
These two politicians would propose significantly opposing policies when
addressing the issue which creates an even greater divide in the world.
  
### Anchoring and adjustment
Anchoring and adjustment is
another cognitive heuristic where an individual starts with an initial
idea, which is the *anchor*, and then makes adjustments based on the anchor
until they reach their decision. Anchoring and adjustment is used by
the political elite when negotiating with foreign countries. The
politicians that participate in foreign affairs might negotiate with
more drastic offers to trick their counterpart into proposing a more
agreeable offer, one that the initial politician was striving for. Based
on the evidence we would propose that politicians that are less prone to
anchoring are better equipped to consider different perspectives and are
generally more effective at executing their desires.
  
### Representativeness
The representativeness heuristic occurs when the similarity of ideas influences the final judgment.
Essentially the decision maker compares the likelihood of a judgment to
their perception of an existing prototype for that event. This is seen
in politics when the political elite classifies officials of other
countries. A politician would be more likely to jump to the judgment of
a foreign leader being a dictator if all the signs in their perception
point to it being so. In an occurrence where an elite political group
examines strict leadership and extreme control of a leader of a foeign
country, due to the representative heuristic, they might be more likely
to classify this leader as a dictator disregarding other necessary
evidence (Steenbergen & Colombo, 2018). This heuristic is used in our day
to day lives more than we could imagine, and in politics this is often the
case with disputes between opposing parties.

## Effects of Heuristics

One might expect that legislative elites strive to effectively utilize
heuristics to make the most accurate and efficient decisions that would
benefit the majority. However, in scenarios where information is
unrepresentative of the truth, which it often is, the judgment of the
elite is often misled. The accessibility heuristic allows elites to make decisions in a manageable way, but may conflict with the majority of constituents’ policy
interests. A 2009 study conducted by psychologist Kristina Miler and her
team at ‘The International Society of Political Psychology’ found that
political leaders account for only a small portion of the relevant
constituents in their district to whom an issue is important, namely
those who tend to be active and wealthy constituents (Miler et al. 2009)
The study findings also argue that there are psychological factors that
come into play even before a legislator engages in political policy
decision-making. This step before the elite engage in a decision is the
judgment of the importance of the values of constituency representation.
The International Society of Political Psychology also provided new
evidence to further exploit the biases in constituency representation by
the legislative elites being misinformed about the views of the
constituents. With a better understanding of the psychology of
heuristics, we would be better equipped to optimize our judgments,
ultimately allowing the elite politicians to come up with the best
decision for the whole population.

## Conclusion

Ultimately, political judgement and decision making has massive
consequences on day-to-day livelihood as well as societal and global
trajectories. As a result, focusing on how the governed and those who
govern make decisions is incredibly important. As the research shows,
individuals and elites, amidst an incredibly complex, rapidly evolving,
and incentive misleading environment, tend to largely rely on heuristics
for decision making. Clearly, political elites are tasked with a
challenging task, and self-interest and many mental shortcuts definitely
play a key role as we show via multiple examples.


## Bibliography


Bartels, Larry M. 2005. “Homer Gets a Tax Cut: Inequality and Public
Policy in the American Mind.” Perspectives on Politics 3 (1): 15–31.

Campbell, A., & University of Michigan. (1960). The American voter. New
York: Wiley.

Cerovac, I. (2017). Elite Decision Making. *The SAGE Encyclopedia of
Political Behavior*. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781483391144.n110<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Ganti, A. (2021, May 19). *Rational Choice Theory* . Investopedia.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/rational-choice-theory.asp.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Gigerenzer, Gerd, Ralph Hertwig, and Thorsten Pachuk. 2011. Heuristics:
The Foundations of Adaptive Behavior. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Lavine, Howard G., Christopher D. Johnston, and Marco R. Steenbergen.
1.    The Ambivalent Partisan: How Critical Loyalty Promotes Democracy.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Mansbridge, Jane, James Bohman, Simone Chambers, David Estlund, Andreas
Føllesdal, Archon Fung, Christina Lafont, Bernard Manin, and José L.
Marti. 2010. “The Place of Self-Interest and the Role of Power in
Deliberative Democracy.” Journal of Political Philosophy 18 (1): 64–100.

Miler, K. C. (2009). The Limitations of Heuristics for Political Elites.
*Political Psychology*, *30*(6), 863–894.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9221.2009.00731.x<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Nyhan, Brendan, and Jason Reifler. 2010. “When Corrections Fail: The
Persistence of Political Misperceptions.” *Political Behavior* 32 (2):
303–330.

Popkin, S. L. (1994). *The reasoning voter: Communication and persuasion
in presidential campaigns*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Smith, L., & Fraser, I. (2020). *Economics of Environmental Policy*.
SOAS.
https://www.soas.ac.uk/cedep-demos/000\_P521\_EEM\_K3736-Demo/module/topindex.htm\#.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Steenbergen, M. R., & Colombo, C. (2018). Heuristics in Political
Behavior. *The Oxford Handbook of Behavioral Political Science*.
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190634131.013.9<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

Vis, B. (2018). Heuristics and Political Elites’ Judgment and
Decision-Making. *Political Studies Review*, *17*(1), 41–52.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1478929917750311<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

1.  1.<span class="Apple-tab-span"> </span>
2.    
3.    
4.    
5.    
6.    
7.    
8.    
9.    
10.   
11.   
12.   
13.   
14.   
15.   
