# The Psychology of Spending

*Quinn Barry & Ginevra Davis*

The nature of spending has fundamentally changed in the coronavirus era.
More consumers are shopping online, and businesses are using innovative
techniques to encourage consumers to spend more. This chapter will
explore how consumers can leverage knowledge of their own psychological
mechanisms to improve spending habits. Specifically, we will review the
psychological research behind different forms of nudging, including the
decoy effect, priming, illusion of scarcity, endowment effect,
reciprocity, social proof, and anchoring, that businesses leverage to
increase sales. While there is a wide variety of both academic and
commercial articles that explore how businesses can implement
psychological tricks to nudge consumers into spending more, there is
little research into how consumers can identify these techniques and
make more optimal purchasing choices. The purpose of this research,
then, will be to review the common psychological strategies that
businesses employ and arm consumers with the knowledge and advice they
need to fight back.

## Demystifying nudging

In this section, we will define the nudges that businesses use to
increase consumer spending, review psychological research that
demonstrates these nudges work, and offer research-backed advice to help
consumers recognize these nudges and mitigate their influence. Each
subsection on the seven nudges we discuss will include the following
information: a clear definition of the nudge, a brief review of the
canonical research that validates the existence of the nudge, an example
of the nudge in action, and research-supported advice for consumers for
when they encounter this nudge.

### Priming

Priming occurs when exposure to one stimulus affects an individual's
evaluation of a later stimulus.<sup>1</sup> In an early study on
internet priming, Mandel and Johnson demonstrate that the color of
websites and graphics on welcome pages can significantly affect
purchasing decisions. To test this effect, Mandel and Johson created two
identical car marketplaces with slightly different opening pages: one
with an orange welcome page with flames to prime customers to value
safety and one with a green welcome page with dollars to prime customers
to value purchasing price. Mandel and Johnson found that subjects, when
primed with the orange background, preferred safer cars to cheaper ones,
and when primed with the green background, preferred cheaper cars to
safer ones.<sup>2</sup> In the brick-and-mortar world, priming could
consist of a restaurant playing Italian music in the background to
encourage customers to spend lavishly on Italian food, or a grocery
store placing arrows on the floor to direct customers toward the healthy
produce aisle. There is not a large array of psychological evidence for
how consumers should avoid priming. The Decision Lab, a Quebec-based
behavioral science research firm, notes that awareness of priming can
produce more optimal consumer behavior and reduce its harmful effects,
though eliminating the influence of priming all together may not be
possible.<sup>3</sup>

### Decoy Effects

The decoy effect is when a company includes an additional pricing or
product option to make the real pricing or product look more attractive
by comparison.<sup>4</sup> The effect was first documented by Huber et.
al in a wide-ranging 1981 study of consumer preferences in cars,
restaurants, beers, lotteries, film, and television.<sup>5</sup> A real life example
of the decoy effect would be a travel company using an artificially
expensive “premier package” with some small perks and extras to make
their standard package look like an economical choice, or a blender
company comparing their standard product to a “lite” low-powered option
to make it look more premium. In order to avoid the decoy effect,
Psychologist Itamar Simonson found consumers should take time to decide
what qualities (such as price, size, quantity, capabilities, etc) they
want in a product before they start shopping.<sup>6</sup>

### Illusion of Scarcity

An illusion of scarcity is when companies highlight or artificially
inflate how close a product is to no longer being available to encourage
consumers to “act now.”<sup>7</sup> In an early documentation of this
effect, Worchel et al. found that subjects rated the attractiveness of
the same cookie much more highly when it was in scarce
supply.<sup>8</sup> Many online retailers use the illusion of scarcity
to encourage consumers to make purchases. For example, popular
craft-resale platform Etsy includes the statistic “there are only X
number of this product available and it is in Y people’s carts” on
products’ landing pages in order to create the perception that dozens of
other users are about to buy the product you are interested in. While
there has not been particular research on how consumers can respond to
scarcity marketing specifically, general best-practices against impulse
purchasing (such as making a list of items you want before you go
shopping) are likely the best bet for conscious consumers.

### Endowment effect

The endowment effect is the psychological phenomenon in which people
price goods they already own as more valuable than they would if they
did not own them.<sup>9</sup> Kahneman et al. documented the strength of
the endowment effect by demonstrating that subjects place a higher value
on mugs when the experimenters randomly assigned a mug to them than when
they had the option of purchasing a mug from a marketplace.<sup>10</sup>
One way businesses may leverage the endowment effect is by instituting
money-back guarantees. Since businesses know that people will value
objects they buy at a higher price once they own them, they can be
confident few people will exercise the money-back option. Citing Weaver
and Frederick (2012), who find that people price items higher than their
value in order to ensure they do not accept a below-market deal, the
Decision Lab recommends that the most optimal strategy for avoiding the
negative implications of the endowment effect is to price your goods as
close to market value as possible.<sup>11,\ 12</sup> Whether you are
buying or selling goods, then, comparing prices for similar goods across
different marketplaces can reduce the endowment effect.

### Reciprocity

Reciprocity’s psychological definition is no different from its common
definition: it refers to the concept of people, organizations, or entities
providing one act or service in response to an equivalent act or
service.<sup>13</sup> Businesses can take advantage of the norm of
reciprocity by giving consumers small free gifts, causing them to feel
socially obligated to reciprocate by spending more later
on.<sup>14</sup> A real-world example of corporations taking advantage
of reciprocity is the practice of giving out free branded swag to
potential customers at conferences and store openings, with the hope
that recipients will remember and feel more inclined to support the
brand in the future. While there has not been extensive research on how
to counteract the social urge to reciprocate, common sense suggests that
the best tactic for consumers would be to refuse or return unsolicited
gifts from corporations.

### Social Proof

Social proof is a concept popularized by Robert Cialdini, 
which states that people who are unsure what
to do in a given situation will copy the actions of their
peers.<sup>15</sup> Companies can take advantage of consumers’ desire
for social proof by creating the perception that “everyone” (or everyone
in their peer group) is also buying their product. One study found that
consumers were more likely to buy low-fat cheese when they were shown a
banner advertising that it was the most sold cheese in the store, even
when placed under conditions that would usually cause them to prefer the
high-fat cheese.<sup>16</sup> A common real-world example of social
proof is the emerging trend of consumer brands paying teenage
“micro-influencers” to promote their products on social media, with the
goal of convincing other young people that many of their peers have
purchased the product independently. While people will always be
influenced by their peers, most social media platforms now require that
sponsored posts be tagged with *\#ad* or *\#sponsored*, giving consumers
more ways to avoid artificial social proof. Preliminary research has
found that users engage with visibly sponsored content at lower rates
than organic content, although sponsored content still receives
significant engagement.<sup>17\ </sup>

### Anchoring

Anchoring bias is the tendency for people to give excessive weight to
the first indicator they are given about the value of an
item.<sup>18</sup> Companies can exploit anchoring bias by initially
listing their products at artificially high prices before discounting
them, which makes customers feel like they are getting a “good deal” at
an otherwise regular price. This phenomenon is seen regularly in the
luxury resale market, where consumers feel as though they are “saving”
money by buying brand name items at a discount, even though the original
prices were not representative of the true value of the item. Anchoring
has such a strong effect that psychologist Kit Yarrow found that
customers who seek out sales and discounts aggressively often spend more
in the aggregate than customers who buy goods at market prices. Yarrow
finds buying at a discount disproportionately results in unsatisfactory
shopping experiences and also gives consumers an addictive rush, which
encourages them to shop more.<sup>19</sup> With this in mind, smart
shoppers can save money by focusing on buying products they will use for
the long-term rather than indexing their purchasing decisions on sales
and promotions.

## Conclusion and Review

Whether online or in-store, advertisers use many psychological nudges to
encourage consumers to make impulsive purchases. The best thing you can
do as a consumer to avoid impulse shopping is to make a list of items
you want *before* you go shopping, enabling you to make your purchasing
decisions before being exposed to companies’ nudges. Similarly,
consumers can optimize their purchasing decisions by deciding what
qualities they are looking for in a product (size, price, brand,
capabilities, etc) before looking at individual products and potentially
being exposed to deceptive advertising. Even using the above strategies,
it is extremely difficult to resist these nudges, as consumers are
working against their own psychology. Nudge theory is a powerful tool
for affecting human behavior for both positive and negative ends. By
understanding what nudges are and how businesses use them, consumers can
maximize their budget and improve their spending habits.

## References

1.<span class="Apple-converted-space">  </span>*American Psychological
Association. APA Dictionary of Psychology.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>*

2.<span class="Apple-converted-space">  </span>Mandel, N., & Johnson, E.
J. (2002). When web pages influence choice: Effects of visual primes on
experts and novices. *Journal of consumer research*, *29*(2), 235-245.

3\. The Decision Lab. (2021, January 22). *Priming - Biases &
Heuristics*.

<span class="s1">4.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span></span>
Huber, J., Payne, J. W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding asymmetrically
dominated alternatives: Violations of regularity and the similarity
hypothesis. *Journal of consumer research*, *9*(1), 90-98.

<span class="s1">5.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span></span>
Huber, J., Payne, J. W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding asymmetrically
dominated alternatives: Violations of regularity and the similarity
hypothesis. *Journal of consumer research*, *9*(1), 90-98.

6.<span class="Apple-converted-space">  </span>Simonson, I. (1989).
Choice based on reasons: The case of attraction and compromise effects.
*Journal of Consumer Research*, 16(2), 158.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

<span class="s1">7.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span></span>
Quelch, J. (2007). How to profit from scarcity. *Harvard Business School
Working Knowledge*.

8.<span class="Apple-converted-space">  </span>Worchel, S., Lee, J., &
Adewole, A. (1975). Effects of supply and demand on ratings of object
value. *Journal of personality and social psychology*, 32(5), 906.

9\. The Decision Lab. (2021, January 29). *Endowment Effect - Biases &
Heuristics*.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

<span class="s1">10. </span>Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R.
H. (1990). Experimental tests of the endowment effect and the Coase
theorem. *Journal of Political Economy*, *98*(6), 1325-1348.

<span class="s1">11.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> 
</span></span>Weaver, R., & Frederick, S. (2012). A reference price
theory of the endowment effect. *Journal of Marketing Research*,
*49*(5), 696-707.

12\. The Decision Lab. (2021, January 29). *Endowment Effect - Biases &
Heuristics*.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

13.<span class="Apple-converted-space">  </span>American Psychological
Association. *APA Dictionary of Psychology*.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

14.<span class="Apple-converted-space">  </span>Gouldner, A. W. (1960).
The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. *American sociological
review*, 161-178.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

15.<span class="Apple-converted-space">  </span>Cialdini, R. B. (2007).
*Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion* (Vol. 55, p. 339). New York:
Collins.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

16.<span class="Apple-converted-space">  </span>Salmon, S. J., De Vet,
E., Adriaanse, M. A., Fennis, B. M., Veltkamp, M., & De Ridder, D. T.
(2015). Social proof in the supermarket: Promoting healthy choices under
low self-control conditions. *Food Quality and Preference,* 45, 113-120.

17\. Barnett, D. (2018). *Sponsored vs Organic Content: Does it affect
engagement?* Influencer Intelligencer.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

18\. *APA Dictionary of Psychology*. American Psychological
Association.<span class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>

19.<span class="Apple-converted-space">  </span>Yarrow, K. (2013,
January 7). *Why Shoppers Just Can’t Resist Clearance Sales*. TIME.<span
class="Apple-converted-space"> </span>
